--- Extracted from: PPRA 2020 -2021 ANNUAL REPORT.pdf ---
i
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
ii
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
iii
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
iv
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021
Prepared in accordance with section 26 of the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015.
Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
11th Floor, National Bank Building, Harambee Avenue
P.O Box 58535-00200, Nairobi, Kenya
Tel: +254-2-3244000
E-mail: info@ppra.go.ke 
Website: www.ppra.go.ke
v
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table of Contents
CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT  ..................................................................................... 1
DIRECTOR GENERAL’S STATEMENT  ..................................................................... 3
KEY ENTITY INFORMATION AND MANAGEMENT  ............................................. 6
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  ............................................................................... 11
THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARD  ................. 16
MANAGEMENT TEAM  .......................................................................................... 24
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT  ........................................................ 26
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ......................................................................................... 29
CHAPTER ONE:  ORGANIZATION OVERVIEW  ......................................... 35
1.1  Introduction  36
1.2  Statutory Functions of the Authority  36
1.3  Organizational structure  38
CHAPTER TWO: DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITIES OF THE AUTHORITY  ...... 40
2.1  Introduction  ..................................................................................................... 40
2.2  Strategic Objective 1: To Strengthen Performance and 
 Compliance Monitoring of the Public Procurement and 
 Asset Disposal System  ................................................................................... 40
2.2.1  Monitoring of Compliance with the Legal and Regulatory 
 Framework  .......................................................................................... 41
2.3  Strategic Objective 2: To Enhance Enforcement of the 
 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Standards  ................................... 63
2.3.1  Complaints Management  ................................................................. 63
2.3.2  Investigations Undertaken  ................................................................ 66
2.3.3  Debarment  .......................................................................................... 68
2.4.1  Issuance of Market Price Reference Guide  ..................................... 44
2.4 Strategic Objective 3: To Conduct Quality Research on Public 
 Procurement and Asset Disposal Issues for Enhanced 
 Service Delivery  ............................................................................................. 70
 2.4.1 Issuance of Market Price Reference Guide  ....................................... 70 
2.5 Strategic Objective 4: To Strengthen the Public Procurement 
 and Asset Disposal Legal and Regulatory Framework  .............................. 71
2.5.1  Provision of Advisory Services  .......................................................... 72
2.5.2  Requests for Approval of Alternative Selection Method for 
 Consultancy Services  ......................................................................... 74
2.5.3  Request for Transfer of Procurement Responsibility  ...................... 47
2.5.4  Strengthening the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 
 Regulatory Framework  ..................................................................... 75vi
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 2.6  Strategic Objective 5: To Equip Persons involved in Public 
 Procurement with Requisite Knowledge and Skills on Public 
 Procurement and Asset Disposal  ................................................................ 76 
2.7  Strategic Objective 6: To Leverage and Enhance Partnerships 
 and Collaborations with Stakeholders  ......................................................... 82
2.8  Public Procurement Administrative Review Mechanism  ............................ 83
2.8.1 Requests for Review Lodged  ............................................................ 83
2.8.2 Decisions Referred for Judicial Review  ........................................... 84
2.8.3 Embedded Legal Researchers at the ARB  ...................................... 84
2.8.4 Development of electronic Administrative Review 
 Management System  ......................................................................... 84
CHAPTER THREE:  MANAGEMENT OF INTERNAL ORGANIZATION  ........ 85
3.1  Corporate Services and Legal  ...................................................................... 86
3.2  Internal Controls and Risk Management  ..................................................... 88
3.3  ICT Support Services  ...................................................................................... 93
3.4  Procurement Operations  ............................................................................... 95
3.5  Human Resource Management and Administration .................................. 95
CHAPTER FOUR:  CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS  ................. 99
4.1 Conclusion  .................................................................................................... 100
4.2 Challenges Faced by the Authority  ............................................................ 101
4.3 Recommendations to Stakeholders  ........................................................... 101
CHAPTER FIVE:  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  .............................................  83
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  ........................................................ 115
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
AS AT 30TH JUNE 2021  ...................................................................................... 116
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN NET ASSETS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  ........................................................ 117
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  ........................................................ 118
STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  ........................................................ 120
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ....................................................... 122 
ANNEXES  .............................................................................................. 143
ANNEX 1:  LIST OF PES THAT SUBMITTED ANNUAL 
PROCUREMENT PLANS  ...................................................................................... 143
ANNEX 1:  LIST OF PROCURING ENTITIES THAT SUBMITTED 
REPORTS ON CONTRACT AWARDS  ................................................................. 150vii
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 List of Tables
Table 1:   Summary of Findings on the Annual Procurement Plans (APPs) 42
Table 2:   Summaries of PEs that submitted Reports on All Contract 
 Awards 43
Table 3:   PEs that Submitted Reports of Direct Procurement 44
Table 4:   PEs that Submitted Reports of Termination of Procurement 
 Proceedings 47
Table 5:   Reports on Contract Variation/Amendments 52
Table 6:   Level of Compliance and Risk Rating 54
Table 7:   Procurement Assessment Compliance Rating and Risk Scores 55
Table 8:   Compliance Rating and Risk Scores for National 
 Government Entities 56
Table 9:   Compliance Rating and Risk Scores for County Executives 57
Table 10:   Compliance and Risk Scores of County Assemblies 58
Table 11:   Compliance Reviews Rating and Risk Scores 61
Table 12:   Level of Implementation of Recommendations 62
Table 13:   Compliance Inspections Rating 63
Table 14:   Status of Complaints Handled 64
Table 15:   Distribution of Complaints by Procuring Entities 65
Table 16:   Investigations Undertaken 66
Table 17:   Details of Debarment Cases and Status 68
Table 18:  Quarterly Distribution of Requests for Advice 71
Table 19:   Duration of Issuance of Requests for Advice by quarters 72
Table 20:   Technical Support and Trainings Offered 77
Table 21:   Status of Cases Lodged within the Year by Quarter 84
Table 22:   Most Visited Menus in the Authority’s Website 87
Table 23:   Most Downloaded Documents 87
Table 24:  Distribution of Number and Value of Contracts by 
 Target Groups 95
Table 25:   Summary of Number and Positioning of Employees in 
 the Authority 96
 viii
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Abbreviations and Acronyms
PE  Procuring Entity
KRA  Kenya Revenue Authority
CSR  Corporate Social Responsibility
KFS  Kenya Forest Service
CDF  Constituency Development Fund
NGCDFs  National Government Constituency Development Fund
DCI  Directorate of Criminal Investigations
EACC  Ethics &amp; Anti-corruption
DC  Debarment Committee
SAGAs  State Administered General Assistance
NDC  National Data Centre
GIZ  Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
 Zusammenarbeit
PPARB  Public Procurement Administrative Review Board
PPIP  Public Procurement Information Portal
PPRA  Public Procurement Regulatory Authority1
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
2
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 This annual report is prepared pursuant to the provisions of section 26 
of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015. It provides 
a summary of activities undertaken by the Authority during the 
2020/2021 financial year with highlights of its operations, requisite 
statistical information; and challenges experienced during the review 
period and recommendations thereof.
During the period in review, the Authority monitored compliance through 
procurement assessments, reviews, contract audits, complaints management, 
investigations and review of mandatory reports submitted by Procuring Entities.
Compliance and monitoring reviews have continued to ensure value for money 
is achieved by a public procurement system that pays attention to economy 
and efficiency. A strategic outcome of compliance has allowed stakeholders 
to understand and monitor how public funds are spent through public 
procurement. 
The Administrative Review Board has continued to play a central role in ensuring 
bidders have an avenue to be heard when procurement disputes arise. The 
Board has strived to exercise impartiality and demonstrate consistency in its 
decisions and is applying various strategies in its operations with an aim of 
enhancing efficiency in handling applications for review and compliance with 
the Public procurement law.
A number of challenges affected the execution of the Authority’s mandate 
during the year under review; these include inadequate budgetary allocation 
& institutional capacity and delayed operationalization of the Capacity-building 
levy. It was noted that some procuring entities failed to submit mandatory 
reports as prescribed.
Beside these challenges, the Authority is committed to providing uninterrupted 
services to stakeholders within the ambit of its legal framework.
Andrew M. Musangi
Chairman
3
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
4
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 The robust public procurement law is aimed at strengthening 
procurement planning; promote growth of the Kenyan economy by 
encouraging micro and small enterprises through participation in 
public procurement opportunities. This is mainly achieved through 
implementation of the preference and reservation schemes, ensuring 
transparency and accountability by streamlining the functions at the National 
Government, County Governments and all other public procuring entities (PEs) 
across the board.
The operation of the Authority is guided by the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act and other relevant Acts of Parliament and Regulations. Further, the 
Strategic plan summarizes priorities areas and sets out objectives, strategies 
and action plans that will help in its implementation with much emphasis on 
the monitoring, assessing and reviewing the public procurement and asset 
disposal system with the ultimate aim of ensuring value for money, transparency 
and accountability . This annual report is therefore a summary of the activities 
undertaken by the Authority during the 2020/2021 financial year with highlights 
of its operations, requisite statistical information; and challenges experienced 
during the review period and recommendations thereof.
Compliance and Monitoring reviews have continued to ensure value for money 
is achieved by a public procurement system that pays attention to economy 
and efficiency. The Authority continued to monitor the level of compliance with 
the Legal and Regulatory Framework through review of mandatory reports 
submitted by procuring entities. During the period, 269 procuring entities 
submitted 38,246 contract awards to the Authority. In addition, 517 reports 
were received on termination of procurement proceedings, 403 on use of 
direct procurement method and 237 on contract variations/amendments. Six 
procurement assessments, 11 procurement reviews, 111 contract audits, 4 
follow ups and 4 inspections were conducted.
The Authority has also continued to offer the appropriate training and advisory 
services to the procuring entities to ensure that the procurement process is 
indeed smooth for all the stakeholders. During the year the Authority received 
and addressed 126 requests for advices and clarifications from procuring entities 
and stakeholders with the main area of concern being contract formation and 
management (reporting, variation/Amendment, extension, and expiry).
Through its Complaints, Investigations and Enforcement department, the 
Authority receives complaints from PEs, suppliers, and the general public. 
During the period under review, handled 483 complaints out of which 435 were 
resolved while 48 were pending by close of the year. 
During the period, the Authority collaborated with the National Treasury to 
sensitize procuring entities at the county level on the Public Procurement and 5
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Asset Disposal Regulation, 2020 the Competition Authority of Kenya during the 
sensitization of counties on the Code of Ethics for Persons Participating in the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Activities, between February and March, 
2021.
The Review Board received 160 appeals against procurements undertaken by 
given procuring entities. As per the requirement of section 171 of the Act, all 
the cases were heard and determined by the Review Board within a period of 
twenty-one (21) days from filing, and thus this requirement was satisfied in all 
the cases. 
The Authority was only able to achieve success in performing the above activities 
through the support extended by its stakeholders. I wish to sincerely take this 
opportunity to thank the National Treasury and Planning, for supporting the 
developments of the various products and initiatives in Public Procurement. I 
would also like to extend my sincere appreciation to the various stakeholders 
both in Government and private sector that have made the implementation of 
the public procurement law a reality.
Pauline O. Opiyo
Ag. Director General
6
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 KEY ENTITY INFORMATION 
AND MANAGEMENT
(a) Background Information
The Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (the Authority) is established 
under Section 8 (1) of the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2015 (PPADA, 
2015) and is charged with monitoring, assessing and reviewing the public 
procurement and asset disposal system to ensure that they respect the national 
values and other provisions of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. To ease access 
to its services, the Authority has four (4) regional offices situated in Mombasa, 
Kisumu, Eldoret and Nakuru.
(b) Vision, Mission and Core values
Vision
A dynamic public procurement and asset disposal system for a prosperous 
nation.
Mission
To regulate the public procurement and asset disposal system through 
monitoring and enforcement for socio-economic development in Kenya.
Core values
1. Intergrity: We uphold honesty and professional ethics in all our operations
2. Innovativeness: We are a learning organization that embraces creativity 
and innovativeness in service delivery and responsive to changes in the 
operating environment.  
3. Customer focus: We are committed to upholding the highest standards in 
service delivery to all customers and stakeholders.
4. Courage: We are bold in the execution of our duties.
5. Teamwork: We work together towards the realization of our mandate.
(c) Principal Activities
The Authority has a mandate to among other functions; monitor, assess and 
review the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal system in Kenya to ensure 
they respect the National Values and other provisions of the law including 
Article 227 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
The functions of the Authority as spelt out under section 9 of the PPADA, 2015, 
include:7
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (a) Monitor, assess and review the public procurement and asset disposal 
system to ensure that they respect the national values and other provisions 
of the Constitution, including Article 227 and make recommendations for 
improvements;
(b) Monitor the public procurement system and report on the overall 
functioning of it and present to the Cabinet Secretary and the county 
executive member for finance in each county, such other reports and 
recommendations for improvements;
(c) Enforce any standards developed under the Act;
(d) Monitor classified procurement information, including that of specific items 
of security organs and make recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary;
(e) Monitor the implementation of the preference and reservation schemes by 
procuring entities;
(f) Prepare, issue and publish standard public procurement and asset 
disposal documents and formats to be used by public entities and other 
stakeholders;
(g) Provide advice and technical support upon request;  
(h) Investigate and act on complaints received on procurement and asset 
disposal proceedings from procuring entities, tenderers, contractors or 
the general public that are not subject of administrative review;
(i) Research on the public procurement and asset disposal system and any 
developments arising from the same;
(j) Advise the Cabinet Secretary on the setting of standards including 
international public procurement and asset disposal standards;
(k) Develop and manage the State portal on procurement and asset disposal 
and ensure that it is available and easily accessible;
(l) Monitor and evaluate the preference and reservations provided for under 
the Act and provide quarterly reports;
(m) Create a central repository or database that includes-
(i) Complaints made on procuring entities;
(ii) Record of those prohibited from participating in tenders or those 
debarred;
(iii) Market prices of goods, services and works;
(iv) Benchmarked prices;
(v) State organs and public entities that are non-compliant with 
procurement laws;
(vi) Statistics related to public procurement and asset disposal;
(vii) Price comparisons for goods, services and works; and
(viii) Any information related to procurement that may be necessary for the 
public
(n) Inform as applicable, the Cabinet Secretary, Parliament, the relevant County 
Executive member for finance, the relevant County Assembly or Auditor-
General on issues of non- compliance with procurement laws once the 8
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 relevant State organ or public entity ignores the written directives of the 
Authority, including material breaches of the measures established under 
the Act;
(o) Generally, report to Parliament and the relevant County Assembly;
(p) Develop a code of ethics to guide procuring entities and winning bidders 
when undertaking public procurement and asset disposal with State 
organs and public entities;
(q) In undertaking its functions, co-operate with state and non-state actors 
with a view to obtaining recommendations on how public procurement 
and disposal can be improved;
(r) Ensure the procurement entities implement the preference and reservations 
and provide data to the Authority disaggregated to indicate the number of 
disadvantaged groups that have benefitted;
(s) Perform such other functions and duties as are provided for under the Act 
and any other relevant law.
(d) Key Management
The Authority’s day-to-day management is under the following key 
organs: 
•	 The	Public	Procurement	Regulatory	Board
•	 Director	General
•	 Management
 
(e) Fiduciary Management
The key management personnel who held office during the financial year ended 
30th June 2021 and who had direct fiduciary responsibility were: 
S/No. Name Designation
1. Maurice O. Juma, MBS Director General. Retired 
in November 2020 having 
served as Director General for 
2 terms.
2. Ms. Pauline Opiyo Was appointed as Acting 
Director General effective 
November 2020.
3. Jane Njoroge General Manager, Technical 
Services (Retired on 10th 
December, 2020).9
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 S/No. Name Designation
4. Rose Nyamweya (Mrs.) General Manager, Finance & 
Admin.
5. Henock K. Kirungu Was appointed Acting General 
Manager, Technical Services 
effective November 2020.
6. Lucy J. Barno Corporation Secretary and 
Head of Legal & Corporate 
Affairs
7. Chris Sakwa Manager, Finance
8. Maximus K. Siwa Head of Procurement
(f) Fiduciary Oversight Arrangements
The operations of the Authority are guided by the Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Act 2015, Public Finance Management Act 2012, relevant Acts of 
Parliament and Regulations and the Mwongozo Code of Governance for State 
Corporations.
Key fiduciary arrangements covering the Authority include:
- The Public Procurement Regulatory Board activities
- Audit and Finance Committee activities
- Parliamentary Committee activities
(g) Entity Headquarters
P .O. Box 58535-00200
National Bank Building, 11th Floor
Harambee Avenue
Nairobi, Kenya
(h) Entity Contacts
Tel: +254 20 3244000
Email: info@ppra.go.ke, 
Website: www.ppra.go.ke
(i) Entity Bankers
National Bank of Kenya
Harambee Avenue Branch
P .O. Box 41862-00200 
Nairobi, Kenya10
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Kenya Commercial Bank
KICC Branch
P .O Box 46950-00100
Nairobi, Kenya
(j) Independent Auditors
Auditor General
Office of Auditor General
Anniversary Towers, University way
P .O. Box 30084 - 00100
Nairobi, Kenya
(k) Principal Legal Adviser
The Attorney General
State Law Office
Harambee Avenue
P .O. Box 40112 - 00100
Nairobi, Kenya
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The Act has established two Boards; the Public Procurement Regulatory Board 
which is the Board of Directors of the Authority, and the Public Procurement 
Administrative Review Board, an independent quasi-judicial body that presides 
over public procurement disputes. 
THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT REGULATORY 
BOARD
The Public Procurement Regulatory Board (PPRB) is the management Board 
of the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority. It is established under section 
10(1) of the PPADA 2015. Its main responsibility being oversight of management, 
operations and activities of the Authority. The PPRB was constituted in 
September 2018.11
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Mr Andrew M. Musangi
Board Chairperson
Mr Musangi is an advocate of the High Court of 
Kenya with more than 25 years in legal practice. 
He is the managing partner at Mukite Musangi 
& Company Advocates and was previously an 
associate at Sheth & Wathigo Advocates.
He is a previous Chairman of the Law Society 
of Kenya, Rift Valley Branch and a past Director 
of the Kenya Rugby Union. From 2005-2012 Mr. 
Musangi served as a Council member of the 
Nakuru Business Association . He has also served 
as a Chairman, of the KRA Local Committee, 
South Rift Region.
Currently Mr Musangi also serves as the 
Chairman of GenAfrica Asset Managers; and as a 
Director at Smart Applications and at Resolution 
Insurance.
He holds a Bachelor of Laws degree (LL.B) (Hons) 
from University of Hull (UK) and a Postgraduate 
Diploma in Law from Kenya School of Law.
Commissioner Lydia W. 
Gachoya
Board MemberCommissioner Lydia is a seasoned Human 
Resources specialist having worked in the private 
sector both locally and internationally up to 
Director level. 
She has previously held the following positions: 
Head of HR, Unga Ltd; HR Team Leader, UN-The 
Netherlands; Regional HR Director, Colgate 
Palmolive and Commissioner, National Gender & 
Equality Commission.
She is the current Vice President, Regional 
Women Forum of International Conference of 
the Great Lakes Region. She also serves in the 
Board of St. Monica Children’s Orphanage in 
Machakos. 
She holds a Bachelor of Education from the 
University of Nairobi and a Post Graduate 
Diploma in Institutional and Project Management.
12
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
Dr Jared M. Siso
Board MemberDr Siso has vast experience having worked 
in the private sector and academia. He is a 
serving Lecturer in Anthropology and Gender 
& Development Studies at the University of 
Nairobi, and the Executive Director of the Wiper 
Democratic Movement.
He also undertaken many research consultancies 
for Kenyan and multinational corporations and 
has several publications under his name.  
Dr Siso, holds a PhD from the University of 
Nairobi; a Postgraduate Diploma in Research 
Methodology from DBL-Copenhagen University, 
Denmark; an M.A (Anthropology) from the 
University of Nairobi and B.A (Anthropology) 
from University of Nairobi.
Mr. Nyamodi is an Advocate of the High Court 
of Kenya with vast experience in legal practice. 
He has been practicing law for more than 22 
years. He is the proprietor of V.A Nyamodi & Co 
Advocates and was previously an Associate at 
the same firm.
Mr Nyamodi is also a director at Jamii Bora 
Bank, at Brook House International Schools 
and Uhoreru Ltd. He has previously served as 
a director at the Kenya Rugby Union and as 
Chairman of the Privatization Appeals Tribunal. 
He holds a Bachelor of Laws (LLB) degree from 
the University of Central England and a Diploma 
in Legal Practice from the Kenya School of Law. Mr Paul Nyamodi 
Board Member
13
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Hon Cecilia has a wealth of experience having 
served in various leadership positions for more 
than 10 years. She has previously held positions 
of Member of County Assembly in Machakos 
County Assembly representing Kiwanie ward 
and councilor in Mavoko Municipal Council. 
She is a serving director of Mavoko Water and 
Sewerage Company. 
She holds a Diploma in Community 
Development and Social work and a second 
diploma in Leadership and Development. 
She has also attended many short courses on 
leadership, management and legislation. She is 
currently pursuing a Bachelor of Leadership and 
Management at Scotts Christian University.
Hon Cecilia M. Sereka
Board Member
Ms. Lilian Moraa  Abishai
Board MemberMs. Lilian Abishai is a representative of the 
Attorney General at the Board. She is a Deputy 
Chief State Counsel at the Office of the Attorney 
General.
From 2008-2009, she was a coordinator at 
Kenyans for Peace with Truth and Justice. She 
has also been an Assistant Program Officer at the 
International Foundation for Election Systems.
Lilian has served as an alternate director at 
the Kenya Film Commission, and is a current 
alternate director at Kerio Valley Development 
Authority. She has a wealth of experience in 
negotiating high level financing, and contracts 
on behalf of the Government. She participated 
in the drafting of the Public Private Partnership 
legislation for Kenya.
Lilian holds a Bachelor of Laws degree from the 
University of Nairobi and a Diploma in Legal 
Studies from the Kenya School of Law.14
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Mr Livingstone Bumbe is the alternate to the 
Cabinet Secretary/National Treasury on the 
Board. He is a Deputy Director, Debt Management 
at the National Treasury and Planning.
He holds a Masters in Public Sector Management 
from the Africa University, Mutare, Zimbabwe and 
a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Nairobi.
Ms. Linda Susan Ingari
Board Member
Linda is a Supply Chain management 
specialist with over 18 years’ experience in the 
Manufacturing, Education, Telecommunication 
and Banking Sectors.  She is a resource person 
in supply chain management at Kenya Institute 
of Supplies Management (KISM) and a part-time 
facilitator.
Linda has served as: Team leader, Procurement 
and logistics, Equity Bank Ltd; Procurement 
manager, KCB Bank Kenya Ltd; Category 
Manager, Technology Solutions, Safaricom; 
Head of College Procurement Section, University 
of Nairobi (College of Agriculture and Veterinary 
services); Part-time Lecturer in Masters of Supply 
Chain Management at The University of Nairobi 
and Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and 
Technology among other positions.   
Linda holds master of Business Administration 
(Kenyatta University), Bachelor of Education 
(Arts) – First class honours (Kenyatta University), 
Graduate Diploma in Procurement and Supply 
(CIPS, UK), International Diploma in Supply 
Management (International Trade Centre), 
Postgraduate Diploma in Business Management 
among other qualifications. 
She serves as a Board Member at Kenya Institute 
of Supplies Examination Board.Livingstone Bumbe 
Board Member15
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 The PPARB is established under section 27 (1) of the Act. It is a central 
independent procurement appeals Review Board. The functions of the PPARB 
include: review, hear and determine disputes arising from procurement and 
asset disposal activities; and perform any other function conferred to it by the 
Act, Regulations or any other written law. The profiles of members of the PPARB 
are provided below.THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT 
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARDFCPA Jane has over 33 years’ experience in the 
fields of Finance, Accounting and Company 
Secretary. Jane currently serves in among 
other positions as: Chairperson Salaries 
and Remuneration Commission (SRC) Audit 
committee, Director – Mhasibu Sacco, Director 
-Empire microsystem, Director – Association of 
Women Accountants of Kenya (AWAK).
She has previously held directorship and senior 
management positions in various institutions 
including: Director – Institutional Consultants 
Ltd, Council member - Institute of Certified 
Secretaries, Acting CEO – EACC, Director 
Finance & Admin – Mater Hospital, warehouse 
manager/chief accountant/Company secretary 
– East Kenya/Nairobi Bottlers Ltd.
Jane holds Bachelor of Commerce (University 
of Nairobi, Master of Arts (ongoing) – Pan Africa 
Christian University. I addition she is a Certified 
Secretary, Certified Public Accountant, Certified 
Professional Mediator and Certified Financial 
Analyst. In addition, she holds professional 
membership of: Institute of Public Accountant of 
Kenya (ICPAK), Institute of Certified Secretaries 
(ICS), Institute of Directors, Kenya Institute of 
Management, Institute of Certified Investments 
& Financial Analysts among others.
FCPA Jane Wanja Muthaura
Board Member16
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Ms. Faith Waigwa is an advocate of the High 
Court of Kenya and has been practicing law for 
more than 15 years. She is the Managing Partner 
of NOW Advocates LLP since March 2011. She 
has served as: Council member of the Law 
Society of Kenya, Deputy Secretary General of 
the East Africa Law Society and Vice President 
of the Law Society of Kenya. She has served as 
the Chairperson of the Review Board since 21st 
September, 2018.
She holds a Bachelor of Laws degree (LL.B) 
(Hons) from the University of Nairobi and a 
Postgraduate Diploma in Law from Kenya School 
of Law. She is currently a Post Graduate student 
at the University of Nairobi pursuing a Master 
of Laws degree (LL.M) in Environment and 
Natural Resources Law; with a specific interest in 
Regulation of Power and Energy and a Master of 
Laws (LL.M) degree in Oil and Gas at Strathmore 
University.
Faith Waigwa
Chairperson
Mrs. Irene Kashindi is an advocate of the High 
Court of Kenya, a Commissioner for Oaths and 
Notary Public with over 12 years’ experience as 
a practicing advocate. She is a partner in the firm 
of Munyao Muthama and Kashindi Advocates. 
She was until June 2018 a partner in Hamilton 
Harrison & Mathews. She has a wealth of 
experience in commercial and civil litigation as 
well arbitration.
She has been a Partner and an Advocate in 
two leading law firms in Kenya, having been an 
advocate of the High Court of Kenya for over 12 
years, six of which at partner level. She is a co-
author of the Kashindi’s Digest of Employment 
Cases. She holds a Masters and a Bachelor’s 
Degrees in Law, and a Post-Graduate Diploma 
in Law, having done her thesis on public 
procurement.Irene N. M. Kashindi
Member
THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT 
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARD17
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Mr. Hussein Were
Member
Hussein Were has over 27 years’ experience in 
quantity surveying and project management. 
He also has 8 years experience in the field of 
governance and forensic investigation. Mr. 
Were is the Honorary Treasurer and member 
of Governing Council of the Architectural 
Association of Kenya; as well as Principal Partner 
and founder of Fanisi Consultants, a quantity 
surveying and project management firm. 
He holds an MA (Building Management) and a 
BA (Building Economics) from the University of 
Nairobi.
Dr. Paul Jilani is a seasoned Supply Chain 
Specialist with over 15 years’ extensive 
experience in industry procurement, logistics 
and supply chain management. He has extensive 
training and expertise in procurement and 
logistic processes, humanitarian supply chain, 
operations management, strategic sourcing and 
management, warehousing and distribution, 
shipping and imports management among 
others.
Dr. Jilani has previously worked as a Supply 
Chain Director, Advisory Contractual Role 
and been the Chairman of the Tetra Pak Sacco 
Limited. He has also been a part-time faculty of 
the KCA and JKUAT universities.
He holds a Doctor of Business Management 
in Global Supply Chain Management, a 
Master of Business Administration in Supply 
Chain Management, a Bachelor of Business 
Administration in Entrepreneurship, and a 
Graduate Diploma in Procurement & Supplies 
Management, UK.
He is a licensed member of the Kenya Institute 
of Supplies Management; a Certified Executive 
Coach and an alumnus of the Strathmore 
Business School Executive Coaching for 
Managers Program (ICF certified); and Public 
Policy Executive Program.Dr. Paul Akida Jilani, DBA, 
MCIPS, CHSCA, CSSC, 
CSCA 
Member
18
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Mr. Awele is a partner at Awele Jackson 
Advocates LLP and a Board Member at the 
LSK SACCO Board of Management. He was 
instructed as a pupil and began practice as an 
Advocate at Kaplan & Stratton and later joined 
Oraro & Co, Clifford chance LLP and One Essex 
Court Chambers (London) before founding 
his current private practice – Awele Jackson 
Advocates LLP .
Mr. Awele advises and represents local and 
international clients in criminal, civil, public 
law and commercial legal disputes including 
property disputes, private client, insolvencies, 
labor, shareholder disputes, debt recoveries, 
redemption actions among others before the 
High Court, Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court 
and Charted Arbitrators.
He holds a holds a Bachelor of Laws degree 
(Moi University), Postgraduate Diploma in 
Law (Kenya School of Law) and a Master’s in 
Business Administration (Finance) (University of 
Nairobi) and various advanced certifications in 
Intellectual Property and other fields.Mr. Jackson Awele 
Onyango
Member
CPA Isabel Juma is a Finance Professional with 
over 20 years of experience across Education, 
FMCG and Beverages. Seasoned in leading 
multi-faceted teams across Strategy, Capital 
Structuring and Financial Management 
functions, resulting in improved business 
efficiency and resource utilization. She currently 
holds the position of Finance Director in a 
leading brewing company in the region, and has 
been a Chief Finance Officer in an international 
private university.
She holds directorships at the CPF Financial 
Services Ltd and the Association of Women 
Accountants of Kenya, and is a member of 
the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of 
Kenya). 
CPA Isabel is a Certified Public Accountant 
– Kenya, and a holder of Master in Business 
Administration and a Bachelor’s in International 
Business Administration from the USIU.CPA Isabel Juma
Member
19
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
Nicholas Sauka Mruttu
MemberMr. Mruttu has been a successful General Manager 
& commercial executive with over 20 years’ 
experience in the FMCG, Telecommunications, 
Mobile Payments & Insurance Sectors, and has 
become an expert in Insurance; Distribution & 
the value chain; Budget control & management 
of sales & revenues in a very large organisation. 
He has previously held the positions of Head 
of Sales for a leading digital TV organization in 
Africa, General Manager – Retail for a leading 
insurance company in Kenya, and Head of Sales 
for two other leading telcom companies.
He holds, a Global MBA from the United States 
International University (USIU) and a B.A. 
Economics from the University of Nairobi.
Ms. Phyllis Chepkemboi is an Advocate of 
the High Court of Kenya with over 11 years’ 
experience, a holder of an MBA degree with 
a bias for Human Resource Management 
and a certified professional mediator with 
a rich working experience in diverse fields 
including general law practice, litigation and 
conveyancing.
Ms. Chepkemboi has previously been employed 
at a state corporation in the water sector as a 
Manager (Legal & Compliance) and at Mumma 
Nyagaka & Co. Advocates as an Associate. She 
is a member of the Law Society of Kenya, FIDA-
Kenya, and a Life member of the Kenya Red 
Cross. She was also a member of the national 
steering committee team that came up with the 
Water Act 2016.
Ms. Phyllis Chepkemboi
Member20
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Mr. Keriolale has been a Community Based 
Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) 
Liaison Officer with the Ministry of Environment 
and Forestry and previously served in the NGO 
sector. 
He has served as CEO/Secretary of Narok 
County Bursary Management Board.
He is pursuing a Master’s of Business 
Management (Strategic Management) from the 
Maasai Mara University, and has a Bachelor of 
Education Degree from Egerton University.
Alfred Mumpasoi Keriolale
Member
Mrs Njeri Onyango She is an Advocate of the 
High Court of Kenya, and proprietor of Njeri 
Onyango & Co. Advocates.
She previously served as a board member of 
the Independent Policing Oversight Authority 
(IPOA). She also serves as a member of the 
Sports Disputes Tribunal, FIVB Legal Tribunal, 
FINA Disciplinary Panel and the Africa 
Continental Result Management Hearing Panel 
(Anti-Doping).
Mrs. Onyango has also undertaken legal 
consultancies with various organizations 
nationally and internationally.
She holds an LLB Degree from the University of 
Nairobi and a Diploma in Law from the Kenya 
School of Law.
Mrs. Njeri Onyango is a fellow of the Chartered 
Institute of Arbitrators London and a member 
of the Charted Institute of Arbitrators-Kenya 
chapter.Njeri Onyango
Member
21
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Hon. Rahab Robi Chacha is the founder of 
the Kuria Women & Youth for Change, that 
comprises of political and youth activist 
volunteers. Hon. Robi Chacha was previously 
a member of the County Assembly of Migori, 
and has been a Director, Youth & Gender at the 
Migori County Assembly Senator’s Office. She 
has also been the Deputy Regional Coordinator, 
Nyanza & Western Region of the Truth, Justice & 
Reconciliation Commission.
She holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Criminology 
and Security Studies from Rongo University and 
a Diploma in Human Resource Management.
Hon. Rahab Robi Chacha
Member
A political economist, Dr. Gitari has over 
three decades of frontline experience in 
human rights, governance and strategic 
communications nationally, regionally and 
globally.  
Dr. Gitari has held senior positions in global 
development organizations in Kenya, Africa 
and other worldwide regions. He has also 
carried out several governance consultancies 
in public and corporate governance regionally.
Dr. Gitari holds degrees in: PhD (International 
Relations); an M.A.: International Relations 
and B.A.: Mass Communications and Political 
Science, all from the University of Denver, 
Denver, Colorado, USA. Dr. Joseph B. Gitari
Member
22
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Mr. Steven Oundo has over 24 years’ 
experience in the Practice of Architecture and 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanisms in 
the Construction Sector. 
He is a past Chairman of the National 
Construction Authority, Past Chairman of the 
Association of Professional Societies in East 
Africa and a Past Chairman of the Architectural 
Association of Kenya (AAK).
Mr. Steven Oundo is a Fellow Member of the 
Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, A Fellow 
Member of AAK and a Trustee of the Registered 
Trustees of AAK.
He has a Bachelor of Architecture, (Hons) and 
an MBA both from the University of Nairobi.Steven Oundo Wandera 
Bwire, OGW
Member
Mr Ngare is passionate on application of 
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) in Conflict 
Management and Criminal Justice.
Notable achievements include being a leader 
on Prison Reforms and Human Behavior change 
and Leader in fake seed reduction in Kenya on 
Promotion of Food Security. 
Mr. Ngare previously served at Kenya Seed 
as Head of Security, Egerton University as 
a Lecturer and Kenya Prisons Service as a 
Regional Coordinator.
He holds a Master of Arts in Criminal/Social 
Order; B.A. Sociology/political Science, PgD in 
Human Recourse Management from the UON, 
Ambrose Ngare, SS
Member23
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Eng. Mbiu Kimani is a Practicing Civil and 
Structural Engineer. Prior to this, Eng. Kimani 
worked with the Government of the Republic of 
Kenya, in the State Department of Public Works 
until he retired on 26th October, 2016. He was 
Acting Works Secretary from December 2015 
up to his retirement in October 2016. He was 
Chief Engineer (Structural) from 1998 up to 
December 2015.
Eng. Mbiu Kimani has previously served on 
the Boards of; Sports Stadia (2012-2014) 
and Egerton University Council (2006-2013) 
as alternate to the PS, Public Works. He has 
also been a Committee Member-Githunguri 
Constituency Development Fund (2008-2012), 
Kiambu County.
He holds a M.SC (Construction), BSc (Civil Eng) 
and a Certificate in Earthquake Engineering and 
Seismology from the Institute of Earthquake 
Engineering and Engineering Seismology, 
University of Kiril and Metodi, Yugoslavia. He 
has also attended many Arbitration and Dispute 
Resolution Courses offered by the Chartered 
Institute of Arbitrators (Kenya Branch).
He is a Fellow of the Institution of Engineers of 
Kenya and a Registered Consulting Engineer 
with the Engineers Board of Kenya.  
Eng. Mbiu Kimani 
OGW, HSC  
Member24
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 MANAGEMENT TEAM
Rose Nyamweya
General Manager, Finance and Admin
PhD (ongoing),MBA,Bcom,CPA(K),CPS(K)
Henock Kirungu
Ag. General Manager, Technical Services
BA, B.Com, CIPS, PGD(Purchasing
& Supplies), PGD (Computer Sci)Lucy J. Barno
Corporation Secretary,Head of legal &
Corporate Services
LLB, Dip (Law), CPS (K),
Advocate of the High Court
Pauline O Opiyo
Ag. Director General
MSc (Proc& Logistics), BA, CIPS
GDip (Purchasing & Supply mgt)
Julius G. Mungai
Manager, Internal Audit
MBA, MA, BA, CPA (K), CPS (K), CISA
Peter K Ndung’u 
Manager, MERRAS
MA (Econ), BA (Econ), CIPS
Dip (Purchasing &amp; Supplies)-UK
24 PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 25
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 James K. Kihara
Manager, HR & Admin
MBA, BA, MCIPSChris Sakwa
Manager, Finance
MBA, BBM, CPA (K)
Thomas O. Otieno
Manager, CIE
MSc (Proc& Logistics), BA,
Dip (Purchasing & amp; Supply mgt)
Philip J. Okumu
Ag. Manager, ARB Secretariat  
BSc (Proc& Logistics)
Dip (Purchasing & Supply mgt)
 
Peter Wangai  
Ag. Manager, Compliance                                    
MSc (Procurement & Logistics), 
BA (Hons), Dip (Purchasing & 
Supply Chain Mgt,
Dip (Forensic & Criminal 
Investigations)
                                     Samson Odhiambo
Ag. Manager, ICT
BBIT, Higher Diploma IMIS
25 PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Maximus K. Siwa
Head of Procurement  
MA,BA, Dip. Purchasing & 
Supplies, Dip. Education, 
MKISM
26
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
STATEMENT
The Public Procurement Regulatory Board is committed to applying and 
maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance at the Authority as 
it recognizes this to be a key contributor to the long term success, value and 
sustainability of the Authority. 
Good corporate governance enables effective and efficient decision making 
and gives a structural aid for the Board to discharge their duty to promote the 
success of the Authority while taking into account the interest of stakeholders. 
Effective governance is achieved through a combination of strong policies, 
process and structures, underpinned by the right values and culture.
The operations of the Authority are guided by the Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Act, 2015 (the Act) and other relevant Acts of Parliament and 
Regulations. The Authority has also adopted and continues to be guided by the 
Mwongozo code of governance in its operations.
The Public Procurement Regulatory Board
The Public Procurement Regulatory Board is established under section 10(1) 
of the Act. Further, the Act provides for a Regulatory Board to comprise of 
nine members. The Director General who is the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Authority is the Secretary to the Board. The Regulatory Board is responsible 
for the long-term sustainability and success of the Authority through provision 
of strategic leadership, steadfast oversight of management and ensuring that 
the Authority provides its stakeholders with a balanced and understandable 
assessment of its current position and prospects. 
Specifically, the functions of the Regulatory Board are:
(a) Ensure the proper and effective performance of the functions of the 
Authority;
(b) Approve and ratify the policies of the Authority;
(c) Oversee the management,control and administration of the assets of 
the Authority in a manner and for purposes that promote the object and 
purpose of the Authority;
(d) Recieve any gifts, grants, donations or endowments made to the Authority;27
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (e) Determine the provisions to be made for capital and recurrent expenditure, 
and for the reserves of the Authority;
(f) Subject to concurrence of The National Treasury, approve the opening of 
bank accounts for the funds of the Authority in accordance with the Public 
Finance Management Act, 2012;
(g) Subject to the approval of the Cabinet Secretary, invest any of the Authority 
funds not immediately required for the purposes of the Act, as it may 
determine; and 
(h) Co-operate with other organizations undertaking functions similar to its 
own, whether within or outside Kenya as it may consider appropriate and in 
furtherance of the functions of the Authority.
The Regulatory Board’s leadership responsibilities involve working together 
with management to set Corporate values and to develop strategy including 
which risks it is prepared to take in pursuit of strategic objectives. Its oversight 
responsibilities involve providing constructive challenge to the management 
team in relation to operational aspects of the Authority’s business, including 
approval of budgets and probing whether risk management and internal controls 
are sound. It has the responsibility of ensuring that timely and understandable 
information is provided to stakeholders.
The Board has delegated the responsibility of management of the Authority to 
the Director General, who is the Chief Executive Officer and the management 
team. The main areas where the decisions remain with the Board are the approval 
of budget and annual corporate plan, approval of policies and approval of 
financial statements. The Board is also responsible for setting the Authority’s 
risk management policy.
As a good corporate governance practice, the Board has delegated some of 
its responsibilities to committees of the Board. The Board receives reports at 
its meetings from the Chairpersons of each of the committees on their current 
activities.
Board Independence, Separation of Roles and Responsibilities
A clear division of responsibility exists between the Chairperson of the Board 
who is non-executive, the non-executive Board members and the Director 
General. Each of the responsibilities are clearly set out in writing. During financial 
year 2020/2021:28
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (a) Board Composition
S.No Name Position Appointment 
Date
1. Mr Andrew M. Musangi Chairperson 20.09.2018
2. Commissioner Lydia W. 
GachoyaMember 20.09.2018
3. Dr Jared M. Siso Member 20.09.2018
4. Mr Paul Nyamodi Member 20.09.2018
5. Hon Cecilia M. Sereka Member 20.09.2018
6. Ms. Lilian M. Abishai Member 20.09.2018
7. Mr Livingstone Bumbe Member 20.09.2018
8. FCPA Jane W. Muthaura Member 15.11.2019
9. Ms. Linda S. Ingari Member 15.11.2019
(b) Board Meetings
The law provides that the Board shall hold at least one meeting in every quarter. 
The Board holds regular scheduled meetings in every year and special meetings 
as and when necessary. In case of non-attendance of a Board member, the 
information is communicated to the Chairman in advance.  
The Director General, is the secretary to Board. He/she is responsible for 
implementing the decisions of the Board and the day-to-day operations of the 
Authority.
The Corporation Secretary provides administrative support to the operations 
of the Board and convenes Board meetings as directed by the Chairman of 
the Board. The Board Secretary provides advice on corporate governance 
principles and plans and also on the implementation of corporate governance 
programs such as Board evaluation. The Corporation Secretary is an advocate of 
the high court, qualified certified public secretary and a member of the Institute 
of Certified Public Secretaries (ICPSK) in good standing.
During the year ended 30th June 2021, the Regulatory Board and its Committees 
held meetings to deliberate on strategic and policy matters central in the 
realization of the Authority’s mandate. Notable strategic resolutions made by 
the Board include; 
(i) The appointment of Ms. Pauline Opiyo as the Acting Director General 
following the expiry of term of the former Director General, Mr. Maurice 
Juma. 29
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (ii) The appointment of Mr. Henock Kirungu as the Acting General Manager, 
Technical Services Directorate following the retirement of Mrs Jane W. 
Njoroge.  
(iii) The Board also established a debarment committee with the mandate 
of determining debarment cases as provided under Section 41 of the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 (the Act) and Regulation 
22 of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Regulations, 2020 (the 
Regulations).
(c) Board Committees and Responsibilities
The Board discharges its functions through committees. All committees of 
the Board are chaired by a member of the Board. A number of members of 
the management team are incorporated in the Board Committees as invitees 
to add value to key Board decisions. This structure ensures that the Board 
pays attention to critical areas of the Authority’s business and provides timely 
guidance on arising opportunities and mitigation of risks.
To enhance efficiency and effectiveness in discharge of its duties, the Board has 
formed four (4) board committees:
(i) Finance & Administration Committee
(ii) Compliance, Communication & Strategy Committee
(iii) Audit, Risk and Governance Committee
(iv) Debarment Committee
(d) Board Development
Training and development programs were organized to equip the Board with 
the necessary skills for effective discharge of their duties and enhancing their 
understanding of the Authority’s mandate. The trainings and capacity building 
programmes were on the following areas:
(i) The Debarment Committee – The committee was trained on conduct of 
debarment proceedings between 22nd and 23rd February, 2021. This 
paved way for commencement of debarment proceeding, with the first 
debarment sitting being held on 22nd March, 2021. 
(ii) The Compliance, Communication and Strategy Committee also held a 
training from 17th to 19th March, 2021, on the Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Regulations, 2020. 
(iii) The Audit, Risk and Governance and the Finance and Administration 
Committees of the Board held a joint virtual training session between from 26
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 27th to 29th January, 2021. The training was aimed at enlightening the 
management, Internal audit, Audit Committee and Finance Committee of 
their roles in the preparation and presentation of financial statements, risk 
management and business continuity. The training was conducted by the 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya (ICPAK).
(e) Board Remuneration
The non-executive Board members are paid taxable sitting allowance as 
approved by the Cabinet Secretary responsible for The National Treasury 
following guidelines from the State Corporations Advisory Committee. The 
Chairperson is paid honoraria at a rate approved by the Government. Transport 
expenses are reimbursed on travel for Board business at the prevailing 
Automobile Association of Kenya (AA) rates. The members are also entitled to 
outpatient and inpatient medical cover, and a personal accident cover.
(f) Conflict of Interest, Code of Conduct and Ethics
The Board has developed a Code of Conduct, Ethics and Performance Manual 
to guide the Board members and staff of the Authority on ethical conduct.
The code requires that all Board members and employees disclose any interest 
that conflicts or may possibly conflict with the interests of the Authority. If a 
conflict of interest is declared, it is a requirement that the Board member affected 
is excluded from any discussion or decision over the matter in question. 
(g) Sustainability
The Authority continues to be fully supported through Government budgetary 
funding (Exchequer grants). Management confirms that with the support from 
the Government, the Authority will continue in business for the foreseeable 
future. For this reason, the Authority continues to adopt the going concern basis 
when preparing financial statements.
(h) Risk Management and Internal Control
The Board has put in place a comprehensive risk management framework which 
identifies and manages risks. The Authority continues to be guided by this risk 
management framework in its daily operations. The following were identified as 
the key risks facing the Authority: -
1. Compliance Audit Risk 
2. Loss of Authority’s and clients’ records 
3. Reputational risks27
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 4. Litigation risks 
5. Occupational Safety, health and environmental risks
(i) Legal Challenges
The Authority faced no legal challenges related to its operations during the 
period under review.
(j) Stakeholder Relationships
The Board endeavours to actively engage with stakeholders by providing regular 
and timely information. The Board is guided by a Corporate Communication 
Strategy which encompasses internal and external communication and 
customer service. The Authority communicates with stakeholders through press 
releases, stakeholder forums and annual reports.
The Board regularly monitors customer service as embodied in the service 
charter.
Corporate Social Responsibility/Community Engagements
In line with the Presidential directive dated 4th June 2018 on “inclusion of 
tree planting in Corporate Social Responsibilities activities” and towards the 
national requirement on attainment of 10% tree cover by 2022, PPRA partnered 
with Kenya Forest Service (KFS) and established an ideal tree planting project 
dubbed “Adopting a forest”. This project will see PPRA establish and maintain 
its own area of natural forest for five years.
During the financial year, the Authority undertook a tree planting activity in 
Kimondi Forest station, Nandi region on 29th June 2021.28
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
29
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report demonstrates the progress that the Public Procurement Regulatory 
Authority (the Authority) has made in regards to the execution of its mandate 
during the 2020/2021 financial year. The Report is segmented into four chapters 
with each addressing a broad area containing a number of strategic objectives. 
The first chapter provides the organizational overview of the Authority in 
terms of establishment and mandate/functions, vision, mission, core values 
and structure. Chapter 2 covers the description of Activities of the Authority 
while chapter 3 outlines the Management of Internal Organization of the 
Authority. Chapter presents conclusions and recommendations to the National 
Treasury and to Accounting Officers. The content of the subsequent chapters is 
summarised below.
1. Strengthening Performance and Compliance Monitoring 
of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal System
(a) Review of Mandatory Reports 
The Authority continued to monitor the level of compliance with the Legal 
and Regulatory Framework through review of mandatory reports submitted 
by procuring entities. During the period, 269 procuring entities submitted 
38,246 contract awards to the Authority. Some of the weaknesses observed 
included: some PEs failed to use the prescribed reporting formats thus ended 
up not disclosing all the required information, such as total contract values, thus 
making aggregation difficult; some procuring entities contracts with values or 
sums in different currencies thus making it difficult to establish the total contract 
sums for all contracts submitted by the PEs; and a number of the PEs submitted 
reports after lapse of the prescribed timelines, while a majority failed to submit 
the reports.
In addition, 517 reports were received on termination of procurement 
proceedings, 403 on use of direct procurement method and 237 on contract 
variations/amendments. On termination, the main reason given by most of the 
PEs for terminations is non-responsiveness of the tenders, quoted prices being 
above market prices and material governance. On use of direct procurement 
method, the major reasons were need for standardization and existence of only 
one supplier for the items under procurement.
(b) Compliance Monitoring Activities 
During the year, the Authority conducted six procurement assessments, 11 
procurement reviews, 111 contract audits, four follow ups and four inspections. 30
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Based on the compliance monitoring activities, the average compliance level 
was 55.4% which indicates average compliance with the Legal and Regulatory 
Framework. 
Some of the weaknesses identified included; most of the PEs not having 
internal procurement and asset disposal manuals; failed to maintain complete 
procurement and contract files as envisaged by Regulation 34(2) of the Public 
Procurement and Disposal Regulations, 2006  and the Public Procurement 
Records Management Procedures Manual (2010); failure by Accounting 
Officers to appoint Disposal Committees as envisaged by Section 163 of the 
Act and Regulation 177 despite having asset that were not being used/obsolete 
asset /inactive Disposal Committees leading to accumulation of obsolete/
unserviceable assets; heads of procurement functions failed to prepare monthly 
progress reports on all contracts to update the Accounting Officers on the 
implementation of contracts; and most of the PEs failed to publicize contract 
awards and submit the same to the Authority as prescribed.
2. Enhancing Enforcement of the Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Standards
(a) Complaints Management 
The Authority, during the period under review, handled 483 complaints out of 
which 435 were resolved while 48 were pending by close of the year. The nature 
of the complaints is shown in the figure below. 
Figure 1: Nature of Complaints Received
31
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 The Authority also commenced 10 investigations during the financial year, of 
which nine had been completed while one was still ongoing as at the close of 
the financial year. 
(b) Debarment 
During the year, the Regulatory Board constituted a Debarment Committee to 
hear and determine all debarment cases. The Debarment and the Secretariat 
were trained by Kenya School of Law between 22nd to 23rd February, 2021 
on processes and procedures for conducting debarment operations. The 
Debarment Committee of the Board received eight requests for debarment, 
out of these five were determined not to have met the prima facie case, and 
three resulted into debarment determination. In addition, two matters out of 
three cases determined were referred to the High court.
3. Conducting Quality Research on Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Issues for Enhanced Service Delivery
The Authority in collaboration with the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 
(KNBS) through a memorandum of agreement prepared and published two 
(2) market price reference guides during the year. In addition, the Authority 
prepared the third market price index report, which was shared with the National 
Treasury for comments and application. The published market price reference 
guide reports are available in the website www.ppra.go.ke for reference by all 
stakeholders. The Authority due to financial constraints following budget cuts, 
did not undertake additional two market surveys as envisaged.
4. Strengthening the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 
Legal and Regulatory Framework
(a) Advisory Services to Stakeholders
The Authority received and addressed 126 requests for advices and 
clarifications from procuring entities and stakeholders mainly on contract 
formation and management (reporting, variation/Amendment, extension, 
expiry), including where entities sought to extend contracts owing to delays 
in finalizing fresh procurement proceedings, seeking concurrence to terminate 
procurement proceedings after entities had issued notification letters; and use 
and customization of the new standard tender documents.32
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (b) Circular on Mandatory Reporting Requirements for Procuring Entities  
The Authority on 22nd April, 2021, brought to the attention of all procuring 
entities the various reports to be submitted to the Authority as required under 
the Act and the Regulations,2020; and to be published in the Public Procurement 
Information Portal (PPIP), vide PPRA Circular No. 01/2021. The reporting formats 
accompanying the Circular are available in the Authority’s website: www.ppra.
go.ke.
(i)  Circular on Insurance of Standard Tender Documents & Formats 
Aligned to the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 and 
Regulations, 2020. 
 The Authority pursuant to Sections 9(1)(f), 58 and 70 of the Act, brought to 
the attention of all procuring entities the availability of the new standard 
bid/tender documents and formats via PPRA Circular No. 02/2021 of 
22nd April, 2021.  The same can be accessed from the Authority’s website  
www.ppra.go.ke or through the link http://ppra.go.ke/standard-tender-
documents.
(ii)  Roll-out of the Upgraded Public Procurement Information Portal (PPIP) 
 To ensure that the Portal (PPIP) is optimized and meets new requirements 
suggested by users and stakeholders, the Authority with of the support 
of the Public Financial Management Reforms program engaged a 
consultant to upgrade the Portal. The Authority brought to the attention of 
all procuring entity users the planned roll-out of the new Portal via PPRA 
Circular No. 03/2021 of 17th May ,2021. The Portal is available for access by 
all stakeholders through https://tenders.go.ke. 
5. Equipping Persons Involved in Public Procurement with 
Requisite Knowledge and Skills on Public Procurement 
and Asset Disposal
The Authority during the period under review, facilitated training and technical 
support for 35 government agencies on the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015; Regulations, 2020; development of internal operational 
manuals and policies and in consultative meetings. 
6. To Leverage and Enhance Partnerships and Collaborations 
with Stakeholders
During the period, the Authority collaborated majorly with:33
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (a) the National Treasury to sensitize procuring entities at the county level on 
the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Regulation, 2020 during the 
months of March, April, May and June, 2021.  
(b) the Competition Authority of Kenya during the sensitization of counties on 
the Code of Ethics for Persons Participating in the Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Activities, between February and March, 2021.
7. Public Procurement Administrative Review
During the year, the Review Board presided over 166 appeals/cases, where 
most of the cases were lodged in the fourth quarter. Of the 166 cases, 106 
(64%) were successful (determined in favour of the applicant), and 15 (9%) of the 
cases were withdrawn. All the decisions rendered by the Board in the reporting 
period have been signed, filed, and uploaded on the Authority’s website: www.
ppra.go.ke.
8. Challenges faced by the Authority
During the year under review, the Authority faced a number of challenges 
including:
(a) Financial constraints that saw most of the planned activities not being 
implemented as planned. This has major implications as the Authority 
was not able to meet its regulatory, statutory obligations and stakeholder 
expectations.
(b) Inadequate institutional capacity in terms of human resource numbers 
and multidisciplinary competencies required to effectively implement the 
expanded mandate of the Authority. The Authority requires additional 
funding for recruitment of additional personnel to the approved 
establishment.
(c) The COVID-19 pandemic, which affected implementation of the activities 
planned for the last two quarters of the financial year in compliance with 
the Government directives.
(d) Some procuring entities have continued to fail to submit mandatory reports 
as prescribed. This has denied the Government and stakeholders valuable 
data for informed decision making on public procurement. This includes 
ignoring the Presidential Executive Order No. 2 of 2018.
(e) Delayed Operationalization of the Capacity building levy: The Authority 
has not been able to meet the stakeholder needs for capacity development 
due to constraints in funding which had been targeted once the levy was 
operationalized.34
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 9. Conclusion
Based on the compliance monitoring activities, the average compliance level 
was 55.4% which indicates average compliance with the Legal and Regulatory 
Framework. This presents an improvement of 25% down from 44.32% registered 
during the previous 2019/2020 financial year. To enhance compliance with the 
Legal and Regulatory Framework, the Authority issued the concerned entities 
with directives on corrective measures to be implemented in order to mitigate 
the risks associated with the identified weaknesses. In addition, the Authority 
continued to offer technical support to the procuring entities to ensure that they 
complied with the law and directives. The operations of the Authority during 
the year were limited following budget cuts and the COVID-19 pandemic that 
stalled implementation of planned activities. The Authority looks forward to 
cooperation and support from the stakeholders to facilitate realization of the 
mandate and aspirations detailed in the Strategic Plan in the coming financial 
year.
10. Recommendations 
(a) The National Treasury should allocate adequate resources to the Authority 
to strengthen delivery of its mandate owing to the importance of ensuring 
efficiency and effectiveness in the public procurement and asset disposal 
system. A well-funded regulator has the capacity of minimizing malpractices 
currently experienced in the public procurement system and immensely 
contributing to the fight against corruption. 
(b) The Accounting Officers should uphold compliance with the provisions of 
the Act while undertaking procurement and asset disposal proceedings.
(c) The Accounting Officers should submit mandatory reports to the Authority 
as prescribed as well as publish in the Public Procurement Information 
Portal (PPIP) in accordance with the provisions of the Executive Order No. 2 
of 2018; 
(d) The Accounting Officers should strengthen records and inventory 
management systems within their entities, to ensure continuity in 
procurement and contract records management.
(e) The Accounting Officers should continuously professionalize and build 
capacity of their staff on the Public Procurement Law and other relevant 
requirements.
(f) The Accounting Officers should promptly pay suppliers and contractors 
within the stipulated contractual requirements.35
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
36
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 1.1  Introduction
The Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (the Authority) is established under 
Section 8 (1) of the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2015 (the Act) and is 
charged with monitoring, assessing and reviewing the public procurement and 
asset disposal system to ensure that they respect the national values and other 
provisions of the constitution. 
A part from the Regulatory Board described above, there exists also the 
Public Procurement Administrative Review Board (the Review Board) which is 
established under section 27 (1) of the Act. The Review Board is an independent 
procurement body primarily mandated to review, hear and determine disputes 
arising from public procurement and asset disposal activities. The Review Board 
is required to ensure reasonable access to its services in all parts of the Republic 
as far as it is appropriate to do so. The Authority provides secretariat and 
administrative services, as well as appointing the secretary to the Review Board.
1.2  Statutory Functions of the Authority
Section 9 of the Act confers the Authority with the following functions:
(a) Monitor, assess and review the public procurement and asset disposal 
system to ensure that they respect the national values and other provisions 
of the Constitution, including Article 227 and make recommendations for 
improvements;
(b) Monitor the public procurement system and report on the overall functioning 
of it and present to the Cabinet Secretary and the county executive member 
for finance in each county, such other reports and recommendations for 
improvements;
(c) Enforce any standards developed under the Act;
(d) Monitor classified procurement information, including that of specific items 
of security organs and making recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary;
(e) Monitor the implementation of the preference and reservation schemes by 
procuring entities;
(f) Prepare, issue and publish standard public procurement and asset 
disposal documents and formats to be used by public entities and other 
stakeholders;
(g) Provide advice and technical support upon request.
(h) Investigate and act on complaints received on procurement and asset 
disposal proceedings from procuring entities, tenderers, contractors or the 
general public that are not subject of administrative review;37
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (i) Research on the public procurement and asset disposal system and any 
developments arising from the same;
(j) Advise the Cabinet Secretary on the setting of standards including 
international public procurement and asset disposal standards;
(k) Develop and manage the State portal on procurement and asset disposal 
and ensure that it is available and easily accessible;
(l) Monitor and evaluate the preference and reservations provided for under 
the Act and provide quarterly reports;
(m) Create a central repository or database that includes-
(i) Complaints made on procuring entities;
(ii) Record of those prohibited from participating in tenders or those 
debarred;
(iii) Market prices of goods, services and works;
(iv) Benchmarked prices;
(v) State organs and public entities that are non-compliant with 
procurement laws;
(vi) Statistics related to public procurement and asset disposal;
(vii) Price comparisons for goods, services and works; and
(viii)  Any information related to procurement that may be necessary for the 
public
(n) Inform as applicable, the Cabinet Secretary, Parliament, the relevant County 
Executive member for finance, the relevant County Assembly or Auditor- 
General on issues on non- compliance with procurement laws once the 
relevant State organ or public entity ignores the written directives of the 
Authority, including material breaches of the measures established under 
the Act;
(o) Generally, report to Parliament and the relevant county assembly;
(p) Develop a code of ethics to guide procuring entities and winning bidders 
when undertaking public procurement and disposal with State organs and 
public entities;
(q) In undertaking its functions, co-operate with state and non-state actors with 
a view to obtaining recommendations on how public procurement and 
disposal can be improved;
(r) Ensure the procurement entities implement the preference and reservations 
and provide data to the Authority disaggregated to indicate the number of 
disadvantaged groups that have benefitted; and38
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (s) Perform such other functions and duties as are provided for under the Act 
and any other relevant law.
1.3 Organizational structure 
The Authority is headed by the Director General and has two directorates namely; 
Directorate of Technical Services and Directorate of Finance and Administration 
each headed by a General Manager. The Corporate Services and ICT departments 
report administratively to the Finance and Administration Directorate, but 
functionally to the Director General. The Internal Audit Department reports 
functionally to the Board Audit Committee and administratively to the Director 
General.
The Technical Services Directorate comprises of Compliance; Monitoring & 
Evaluation Research, Reporting and Advisory Services; Complaints, Investigations, 
Enforcement & Debarment, Administrative Review Board Secretariat, and 
Regional Offices; whereas Finance and Administration Directorate comprises 
of Finance; Procurement, and Human Resource Management & Administration. 
 39
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
40
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 2.1  Introduction
The Authority’s functions in the 2020/2021 financial year focused on 
implementation of programmes under the six thematic areas as outlined in the 
Strategic Plan for the 2018-2023 period. The thematic areas include: Compliance 
and Enforcement of Standards; Research and Information Management; 
Legal and Regulatory Framework; Capacity Building and Technical Support; 
Stakeholder Engagement; and Institutional Capacity Strengthening. 
Each thematic area has a set of strategic objectives and strategies being 
implemented to facilitate achievement of our mission and vision. These strategic 
objectives are:
(a) To strengthen performance and compliance monitoring of the public 
procurement and asset disposal system;
(b) To enhance enforcement of the public procurement and asset disposal 
standards;
(c) To conduct quality research on public procurement and asset disposal 
issues for enhanced service delivery;
(d) To strengthen the public procurement and asset disposal legal & regulatory 
framework;
(e) To equip persons involved in public procurement with requisite knowledge 
and skills on public procurement and asset disposal;
(f) To leverage and enhance partnerships and collaborations with stakeholders; 
and
(g) To strengthen institutional capacity.
This annual report describes the work and activities implemented by the 
Authority between 1st July, 2020 and 30th June, 2021. It summarizes work 
carried out to meet the regulatory obligations for the realization of the vision 
through the different strategic objectives. 
2.2 Strategic Objective 1: To Strengthen Performance and 
Compliance Monitoring of the Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal System
The Authority is mandated under Section 9 (1) (a) & (b) of the Act to monitor, 
assess and review the public procurement and asset disposal system to 
ensure respect for the national values and other provisions of the Constitution, 
including Article 227 and make recommendations for improvements. This 
includes monitoring the performance of the system and reporting on its overall 41
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 functioning. This subsection therefore details the strategies deployed by the 
Authority to realize this goal and the milestones realized thus far.
2.2.1  Monitoring of Compliance with the Legal and Regulatory 
 Framework
The Authority monitors compliance with the Legal and Regulatory Framework 
through a number of strategies including, procurement assessments, 
procurement reviews, contract audits, inspections, follow up of implementation 
of recommendations and review of mandatory reports submitted by procuring 
entities (PEs). During this year, the Authority implemented a number of activities 
as discussed in subsequent subsections.
2.2.1.1 Review of Mandatory Reports
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, procuring entities (PEs) are required to 
submit mandatory reports to the Authority within the prescribed timelines. The 
reports include, all contract awards; terminations of procurement proceedings; 
direct procurement above Kes. 500,000; disposal to employees; contract 
variations/amendments, terminated contracts, contract awards under the 
preference and reservation schemes and part of the consolidated annual 
procurement plan demonstrating application of preference and reservation 
schemes. The Authority reviews the reports to assess compliance with the 
provisions of the Procurement Law and relevant directives.  
(a) Review of Annual Procurement Plans
The Act requires PEs to submit to the Authority the part of the consolidated 
annual procurement plan demonstrating compliance with Section 158(2) of 
the Act on preference and reservation schemes and PPRA Circular No.1/2021 
of 22nd April, 2021. The Authority reviewed the plans to determine whether 
they were prepared in accordance with Sections 53 (6) and 157(5) & (10) of 
the Act, Regulations 40 and 41 of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal. 
Regulations, 2020 (the Regulations) and the directives issued by the Authority. 
The PEs are required to reserve at least 30% of their annual procurement 
budget for procurement of goods, works and services from enterprises owned 
by youth, women and persons with disabilities. County Government entities are 
further required to apply preference and reservation scheme whereby 20% of 
their annual procurement budgets should be reserved for resident tenderers in 
the respective counties, pursuant to Section 33(2) (g) of the Act and Regulation 
40(5). 
During the year, 118 PEs submitted part of the annual procurement plans for 
the 2020/2021 financial year to the Authority. This presents a drop of 26.7% 
(43 PEs) from 161 PEs that submitted procurement oplan in the previous 42
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 2019/2020 financial year. The plans were reviewed and a summary of the 
findings presented in the table below.
Table 1: Summary of Findings on the Annual Procurement Plans (APPs)
No. Number 
1. Number APPs for the 2020/2021 FY submitted to the 
Authority118
2. Number of APPs submitted within the prescribed 
deadline of 31st August, 202079
3. Number of APPs submitted after the deadline of 31st 
August, 202039
4. Number of APPs where at least 30% of the Procurement 
Budget was Reserved44
5. Number of PEs whose allocation for Reservation Scheme 
was below the minimum threshold of at least 30% of the 
Procurement Budget37
6. Number of APPs without evidence of reserving at least 
30% of the Procurement Budget for Reservation Scheme37
From the table above, out of 118 PEs that submitted plans, 44 PEs reserved at 
least 30% of their procurement budget for procurement of goods, works and 
services from enterprises owned by youth, women and persons with disabilities 
(PWDs). The remaining PEs reserved less than the prescribed minimum 
threshold of at least 30% of their procurement budget or none at all. The details 
of the PEs that submitted the plans is presented in annex 1. 
Among the weaknesses identified in the procurement plans included, failure 
by some of the PEs to comply with the requirement of reserving at least 30% of 
the procurement budget for enterprises owned by youth, women and persons 
living with disability contrary to Sections 53(6) and 157 (5) & (10) of the Act; 
failure by some of the PEs to reserve any procurement for the reservation 
scheme; failure by all other PEs to submit procurement plans to the Authority 
as directed.
(b) Review of Reports on Procurement Transactions
(i) Reports on All Contract Awards
During the year, 269 PEs (compared to 263 PEs during previous reporting 
period) reported a total of 38,246 contracts. A list of the PEs and the nature of 
the reports that they submitted to the Authority is presented in Annex 2. The 
table below presents a summary of the number of PEs that submitted reports 
on contract awards.43
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table 2: Summaries of PEs that submitted Reports on All Contract Awards
No. National Government 
EntitiesEstimated 
Number of PEsNumber of PEs 
that Reported
1. State Corporations and SAGAs 370 121
2. Ministries and State 
Departments46 16
3. Constitutional Commissions 
and Independent Offices19 11
4. Public Colleges and 
Polytechnics, Technical 
Training Institutions 110 29
5. Public Universities and 
University Colleges39 31
6. NGCDF Committees 290 9
7. NGAAF Committees 47 0
8. County Service Coordination 
Units47 0
9. Diplomatic Commissions 56 0
10. Public Primary and Secondary 
Schools32,800 0
11. Pension Funds for Public 
Entities- 5
Sub-total 33,824 222
County Government Entities
12. County Executives 47 25
13. County Assembly 47 21
14. County Agencies 57 1
15. City Boards and other Urban 
Areas1 0
Sub-total 152 47
Total Est. 33,976 269
From the review of the reports, the Authority observed the following:
(i) Some of the PEs failed to use the prescribed reporting formats thus ended 
up not disclosing all the required information, such as total contract values, 
thus making aggregation difficult. 
(ii) Some procuring entities contracts with values or sums in different currencies 
thus making it difficult to establish the total contract sums for all contracts 
submitted by the PEs.44
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (iii) A number of the PEs submitted reports after lapse of the prescribed 
timelines for submission of reports.
(iv) Some PEs were reporting only contracts awarded under the Preference and 
Reservation schemes, without reporting on other contracts awarded. 
(ii) Reports on use of Direct Procurement Method
During the year, a total of 403 reports on use of direct procurement method for 
procurements above KES 500,000, were submitted to the Authority by 72 PEs. 
During the previous 2019/2020 financial year a total of 603 reports on use of 
direct procurement method for procurements were submitted which presents 
a decline of 33.25%.The PEs and number of reports submitted is presented in 
the table below. 
Table 3: PEs that Submitted Reports of Direct Procurement
No. Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
State Corporations and SAGAs
1. Kenya Airports Authority 12
2. Kenya Ports Authority 17
3. Kenya Ferry Services Limited 19
4. Kenya Civil Aviation Authority 2
5. Kenya Maritime Authority 1
6. Geothermal Development Company 19
7. Kenya Petroleum Refineries 3
8. Kenya Power & Lightening Company 1
9. Kenya Post Office Savings Bank 2
10. Women Enterprise Fund 1
11. Industrial & Commercial Development Corporation  1
12. Office of Auditor General 4
13. Kenya Revenue Authority 15
14. Insurance Regulatory Authority 5
15. Kenyatta University Teaching, Referral and Research 
Hospital (KUTRRH)7
16. South Nyanza Sugar Company Ltd 15
17. East African Portland Co. Ltd 6
18. National Transport & Safety Authority 1
19. Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (KEMSA) 22
20. Moi Teaching & Referral Hospital 25
21. Kenya Railways 1445
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
22. National Housing Corporation 1
23. Kenya National Highways Authority 1
24. Retirement Regulatory Authority 2
25. Nuclear Power and Energy Agency (NuPEA) 3
26. Commission on Revenue Allocation 1
27. Kenya Electricity Generating Company 10 
28. National Oil Corporation of Kenya 1
29. Kenya Animal Genetic Resources Centre 8
30. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 1
31. Kenya Veterinary Production Institute 3
32. Athi Water Works Development Agency 32
33. Public Procurement and Regulatory Authority 2
34. Kenya Veterinary Board 1
35. Kenyatta National Hospital 40
36. Nyayo Tea Zones Development Corporation 1
37. Kenya Forest Services 3
38. Kenya Safari Lodges and Hotels 1
39. Kenya Tourism Board 1
40. Kenyatta International Convention Centre 2
41. National Crime Research Centre 1
42. National Hospital Fund 1
43. Nzoia Sugar Company 1
44. Kenya Film Commission 1
45. Universities Fund 1
Sub-total 311
Commissions & Independent Offices
46. Teachers Service Commission 7
47. Parliamentary Service Commission 1
48. Ethics and Anti - Corruption Commission 1
49. Independent Electoral & Boundaries Commission 1
Sub-total 10
Public Universities and Colleges 
50. Kisii University 1
51. Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and 
Technology4946
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
52. University of Nairobi 1
53. Pwani University 1
54. Tharaka University College 1
55. Taita Taveta University 1
56. University of Eldoret
Sub-total 54
Ministries & State Departments 
57. Ministry of Sports, Culture and Heritage 1
58. State Department of Broadcasting 3
59. Ministry of Transport, Infrastructure, Housing, Urban 
Development and Public Works1
60. Ministry of Water, Sanitation and Irrigation 1
Sub-total 6
Pension Funds for Public Entity
61. Kenya Power Pension Fund 1
Sub-total 1
County Assemblies 
62. County Assembly of Nairobi 2
63. County Assembly of Wajir 1
64. County Assembly of Nandi 1
Sub-total 4
National Government CDF Committees
65. National Government CDF Juja 1
66. National Government CDF Mukurwe-ini 1
Sub-total 2
County Governments 
67. County Government of Elgeyo Marakwet 4
68. Nakuru County Government 3
69. County Government of Kirinyaga 2
70. County Government of Nyandarua 4
71. County Government of Laikipia 1
72. County Government of West Pokot 1
Sub-total 15
Total 40347
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 From the table above, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology 
submitted the highest number of reports (49) on use of direct procurement 
method, followed by Kenyatta National Hospital (40), Athi Water Works 
Development Agency (32), Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital (25) and Kenya 
Medical Supplies Authority (22). The common reasons given by the PEs for use 
of direct procurement method were that the goods or services were available 
only from a particular supplier, and need for standardization pursuant to 
Sections 103 (2)(a) and (d) of the Act. 
Among the weaknesses identified from the reports submitted were failure 
by some of the PEs to prepare their reports using the appropriate format 
and as result failing to submit some of the required information/documents; 
submission of reports on quarterly basis rather than within the prescribed 
period of fourteen (14) days after notification of award.
The Authority has planned to make follow-ups to verify the circumstances that 
necessitated use of direct procurement methods by the procuring entities that 
reported the highest instances of use of the method in the 2021/2022 financial 
year. 
(iii)  Reports on Termination of Procurement and Asset Disposal Proceedings
During the year, a total of 517 reports on termination of procurement 
proceedings were submitted to the Authority by 131 procuring entities. During 
the previous 2019/2020 financial year a total of 631 reports on termination of 
procurement proceedings were submitted which presents a decline of 18.1%.A 
list of PEs that submitted the termination reports is presented in the table below.
Table 4: PEs that Submitted Reports of Termination of Procurement 
Proceedings
No.  Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
State Corporations and SAGAs
1. Kenya Ports Authority 30
2. Geothermal Development Company 23
3. Kenya Pipeline Company Ltd 22
4. Kenya Revenue Authority 16
5. Kenya Airports Authority 15
6. Kenya National Highways Authority 11
7. Retirement Benefit Authority 10
8. National Oil Corporation of Kenya 10
9. Communication Authority of Kenya 948
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No.  Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
10. Kakamega County Urban Water and Sanitation 
Corporation8
11. National Construction Authority 7
12. Privatization Commission 7
13. Kenya Reinsurance Corporation Ltd 7
14. National Transport & Safety Authority 6
15. Kenya petroleum Refineries 6
16. Kenya Electricity Generating Company 6
17. Moi Teaching & Referral Hospital 6
18. Unclaimed Financial Assets Authority 5
19. Numerical Machining Complex 5
20. Kenya Post Office Savings Bank 4
21. National Water Harvesting & Storage Authority 4
22. Kerio Valley Development Authority 4
23. Kenya National Hospital 4
24. Kenya Rural Roads Authority 4
25. Kenya Maritime Authority 3
26. Nuclear Power& Energy Agency 3
27. Capital Markets Authority 3
28. Athi Water Works Development Agency 3
29. Thika Water and Sewerage Company 3
30. Kenya Railways 3
31. Insurance Regulatory Authority 3
32. Kenya Civil Aviation Authority 3
33. Kenya Power & Lightening 2
34. Kenya Power Pension Fund 2
35. Kenya Water Towers Agency 2
36. East Africa Portland Cement Co. Ltd 2
37. South Nyanza Sugar Co. Ltd 2
38. ICT Authority 2
39. Media Council of Kenya 2
40. Kenya Deposit Insurance Corporation 2
41. Kenya Broadcasting Corporation 2
42. Kenya Medical Supplies Authority 2
43. Public Procurement Regulatory Authority 249
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No.  Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
44. Kenya Safari Lodges and Hotels 2
45. University of Nairobi Enterprises and Services 2
46. Kenya Vision 2030 Delivery Secretariat 1
47. Sacco Societies Regulatory Authority 1
48. Kenya Bureau of Standards 1
49. Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company Lim -
ited1
50. Commodities Fund 1
51. Kenya Dairy Board 1
52. Kenya Ferry Services 1
53. Warehousing Receipt System Council 1
54. Kenya Film Commission 1
55. Kenya National Trading Corporation 1
56. National Hospital Fund 1
57. Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority 1
58. Kenya Urban Rural Authority 1
59. Kenya Vetinary Board 1
60. Nyayo Tea Zones Development Corporation 1
61. Agricultural Finance Corporation 1
62. Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research 
Organization 1
63. Kenya International Convention Centre 1
64. Kenya National Convention Bureau 1
65. Kenya Leather Development Council 1
66. Kenya Literature Bureau 1
67. National Crime Research Centre 1
68. Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development 1
69. Kenya National Examination Council 1
70. Kilifi-Mariakani Water and Sewerage Company 
Limited1
71. Kenya Animal Genetic Resources Centre 1
72. University Fund 1
73. Tourism Fund 1
74. Water Sector Trust Fund 1
Sub-total 30850
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No.  Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
Pension Funds for Procuring Entities
75. Kenya Power Pension Fund 9
Sub-total 12
Constitutional Commissions and Independent 
Offices 
76. Independent Electoral & Boundaries Commission  4
77. Office of Auditor General 3
78. Judiciary Service Commission 3
79. Parliamentary Service Commission 3
80. Teachers Service Commission 2
81. Ethics and Anti - Corruption Commission 2
82. Office of The Director of Public Prosecutions 1
Sub-total 19
County Assemblies 
83. County Assembly of Nairobi 8
84. County Assembly of Nyeri 5
85. County Assembly of Machakos 2
86. County Assembly of Siaya 1
87. County Assembly of Nandi 1
88. County Assembly of Laikipia 1
89. County Assembly of Embu 1
 Sub-total 19
County Governments 
90. County government of Kitui 41
91. County government of Uasin Gishu 31
92. County government of Kisumu 10
93. County Government of Bungoma 6
94. County Government of Nandi 5
95. County Government of Kiambu 2
96. County Government of Kakamega 2
97. County Government of Bomet 1
98. County Government of Muranga 1
99. County Government Kirinyaga 1
100. County Government of Embu 151
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No.  Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
101. County Government of West Pokot 1
Sub-total 101
Public Universities and Colleges 
102. Technical University of Mombasa 11
103. Meru University of Science and Technology 7
104. Pwani University 3
105. Multimedia University of Kenya 3
106. Masinde Muliro University of science and 
Technology3
107. Kisii University 2
108. Maseno University 1
109. Egerton University 1
110. Maasai Mara University 1
111. Chuka University 1
112. Embu University 1
113. Karatina University 1
114. Kenya Coast National Polytechnic 1
115. Taita Taveta University 1
116. Kenya Institute of Mass Communication 1
117. University of Eldoret 1
118. Bandari Maritime Academy 1
Sub-total 40
National Government CDF Committees
119. National Government CDF Juja 1
120. National Government CDF Mukurwe-ini 1
Sub-total 2
Ministries & State Departments 
121. Ministry of Energy 4
122. Ministry of Water, Sanitation & Irrigation 3
123. The National Treasury and Planning 3
124. Ministry of East African Community and Regional 
Development2
125. Ministry of Environment and Forestry 2
126. Ministry of Sports, Culture and Heritage 152
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No.  Procuring Entity Number of 
Reports
127. Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife 1
128. State Department of Trade 1
129. State Department of Public Service 1
130. Ministry of Health 1
131. Office of Attorney General and Department of 
Justice1
Sub-total 20 
Total 517
Based on the above information, County Government of Kitui submitted the 
highest number (41) of reports on termination of procurement proceedings 
followed by County Government of Uasin Gishu (31), Kenya Ports Authority (30), 
Geothermal Development Company (23), Kenya Pipeline Company (22), Kenya 
Revenue Authority (16) and Kenya Airport Authority (15). 
The main reasons that were given by the PEs for terminations of procurement 
proceedings were non-responsiveness of the tenders, inadequate budgetary 
provision, operational of law, material governance and the quoted prices being   
above the prevailing market prices. Among the weaknesses of the reports 
submitted were failure by some of the PEs to adhere to the reporting timelines; 
to adhere to the reporting format and failure to submit some of the required 
information. The Authority communicated the weaknesses to the concerned 
PEs to undertake corrective measures. 
(d)  Reports on Contract Variations/Amendments  
Section 139(5) of the Act requires procuring entities to submit reports on 
contract variations or amendments to the Authority on a quarterly basis. During 
the year, the Authority received 237 reports on varied/amended contracts 
from 20 PEs which presents an increase of 243.5% down 69 reports on varied/
amended contracts submitted during the previous 2019/2020 financial year. 
The details of the reports on varied/amended contracts are as detailed in the 
table below. 
Table 5: Reports on Contract Variation/Amendments
No Procuring Entity Contract Variation/
Amendment
State Corporations and SAGAs
1. Kenya Medical Supplies Agency 76
2. Kenya Airports Authority 4953
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No Procuring Entity Contract Variation/
Amendment
3. Kenya National Highway Authority 42
4. National Oil Corporation of Kenya 13
5. National Environment Trust Fund 10
6. Kenya Civil Aviation Authority 7
7. Kenya Revenue Authority 6
8. Kenya Electricity Generating Company 5
9. Kenya Safari Lodges and Hotels 3
10. National Transport & Safety Authority 2
11. ICT Authority 2
12. Kenya Maritime Authority 1
13. South Nyanza Sugar Company 1
14. Kenya Veterinary Production Institute 1
15. Consolidated Bank 1
16. Kakamega County Urban Water and Sanitation 
Corporation1
Subtotal 220
County Government & Assemblies
17. County Government of Kwale 1
Subtotal 1
Ministries & State Departments
18. Ministry of Transport, Infrastructure, Housing, 
Urban Development & Public Works2
19. The Judiciary 13
Subtotal 15
Public Universities and Colleges
20. Kaimosi Friends University College 1
Subtotal 1
Total 237
From the above information, Kenya Medical Supplies Authority submitted the 
highest number (76) of contract variations reports, followed by Kenya Airport 
Authority and Kenya National Highway Authority at 49 and 42 respectively. 
Whereas most of the contract variations/amendments conformed to the 
conditions set out in Section 139 of the Act, there were some  weaknesses 
identified in the reports which included; some of the reports being submitted 54
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 outside the prescribed period of 14 days after the end of the quarter the 
contracts were varied. Other PEs submitted reports without attaching the 
relevant supporting documents, while other PEs prepared reports without 
adhering to the format provided by the Authority thus providing incomplete 
information. There were also some PEs who varied contract before lapsing of 
one (1) after signing of the contrast contrary to Section 139(4) of the Act.
2.2.1.2  Procurement Assessments, Reviews and Contract Audits 
Section 43 of the Act mandates the Authority to conduct Inspections, 
Assessments, audits, and Reviews relating to contracts, procurement and asset 
disposal proceedings. During the reporting period the Authority conducted 
Assessments, contract audits, and procurement Reviews. The Authority evaluates 
the level of compliance with the Procurement Law by the PEs against pre-set 
scoring criteria in the Compliance Monitoring Manual. The interpretation of 
compliance level and risk rating is as follows.
Table 6: Level of Compliance and Risk Rating
S/
No.Compliance 
RatingCompliance level Risk Rating Risk Level
1. Below 50% Non-compliant 70-100% High
2. 51-80% Average compliance 30-70% Moderate
3. 81-99% Above Average 
complianceBelow 30% low
4. 100% Fully Compliant 0% No Risk
The higher the compliance rating, the lower the risk score and vice versa. 
When the compliance level is low, the procurement performance by the PE is 
low and the risk for not achieving value for money expended through public 
procurement is high.
(a) Procurement Assessments 
During the year, the Authority conducted procurement assessments in six (6) 
PEs at National Government level. The compliance levels of the six (6) PEs are 
indicated in the table below:55
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table 7: Procurement Assessment Compliance Rating and Risk Scores
No. Procuring Entity Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks Score 
(%)
1. Nyayo Tea Zones Development 
Corporation60.3 39.7
2. Coast Water Works Development 
Agency56.5 43.5
3. Kenya Deposit Insurance Corporation 54.0 46.0
4. Kenya Medical Training College-Kilifi 54.0 46.0
5. Bondo Teachers Training College 53.0 47.0
6. Kakamega Golf Hotel  36.0 64.0
7. Eldama Ravine Technical and Vocational 
Training Institute41 59
8. Narrok High School 26.6 73.4
9. National Government Constituency 
Development Fund, Bomet Central 
Constituency13.3 86.7
Average Score (%) .43.9% 56.1%
From the above information, the average compliance score for the PEs that 
were assessed in the review period was 43.9% which is indication of average 
compliant with the Legal and Regulatory Framework, with a corresponding 
moderate risk level of 56.1%. A general finding from the assessments was 
that the compliance level of the Schools and CDF was low with high level of 
risk ratings than the other categories of the PEs that were considered in the 
procurement assessments. 
Among the key strengths from the findings of the assessment included 
establishment of procurement function, procurement planning and use of 
the standard tender documents by most of the procuring entities. The PEs 
that were assessed during the year had common weaknesses which included 
failure to maintain individual procurement files, in some instances the individual 
procurement files did not have some of the procurement records like payment 
vouchers, delivery notes and invoice; and lack of updated procurement and asset 
disposal manual/policy. The Schools and the CDF had very weak procurement 
system which contributed to low compliance level and high risk rating. 
(b) Compliance Monitoring through Contract Audits
During the year, the Authority conducted contract audits in 111 procuring 
entities. This included 23 PEs from the National Government; 44 County 56
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Executives and 44 County Assemblies. The compliance and risk ratings for all 
the PEs that were audited in the review period is presented in tables below.
Table 8: Compliance Rating and Risk Scores for National Government 
Entities 
No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
1. Machakos University 80.9 19.1
2. Machakos County Service Delivery 
Coordinating Unit 66.0 34.0
3. Pwani University 64.0 36.0
4. Koitaleel Samoei University College 64.0 36.0
5. Nakuru Water & Sewerage Co. Ltd 63.9 36.1
6. Kirinyaga University 59.12 40.88
7. Rongo University 59.0 41.0
8. Migori Teachers College 59.0 41.0
9. National Authority for the Campaign 
Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse58.2 41.9
10. Bomet University College 58.2 41.8
11. Matuga NGCDF 57.5 42.5
12. Kenyatta International Convention Centre 56.4 43.6
13. Kenya Medical Training College-Kilifi 54.0 46.0
14. Central Rift Valley Water Works 
Development Agency 51.9 48.1
15. Baringo Central National Constituency 
Development Fund49.9 50.1
16. Jaramogi Odinga Oginga University of 
science and Technology 48.5 51.5
17. Moi University ACE II Project 45.6 54.4
18. Kwale Water & Sewerage Co. Ltd 42.0 58.0
19. Kirinyaga County Service Delivery 
Coordinating Unit 40.8 59.2
20. Baringo County Service Delivery 
Coordination Unit34.2 65.8
21. Nyeri County Service Delivery 
Coordinating Unit 28.7 71.3
22. Maasai Mara University 27.5 72.5
23. Kimathi University 26.9 73.1
Average Scores (%) 52.0% 48.0%57
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Based on the scores in the table above, the average compliance level for the 
audited County Executive was 52% while the risk level is 48 %. This implied that 
all the six PEs that were audited during the first quarter demonstrated average 
compliance with the Public Procurement Law. 
Table 9: Compliance Rating and Risk Scores for County Executives 
No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
1. Trans Nzoia County Government 75.3 24.7
2. Nyamira County Government 75.0 25.0
3. Bungoma County Government 74.0 26.0
4. Nyeri County Government 73.9 26.1
5. Nandi County County Government 72.0 28.0
6. Busia County government 70.0 30.0
7. Bomet County Government 69.2 30.8
8. Tharaka Nithi County Government 69.1 30.9
9. Wajir County Government. 69.0 31.0
10. Kwale County Government 68.0 32.0
11. Kilifi County Government 67.0 33.0
12. Kericho County Government 66.7 33.3
13. Embu County Government 65.0 35.0
14. Baringo County Government 64.8 35.2
15. Mombasa County Government 64.0 36.0
16. West Pokot County Government 62.9 37.1
17. Isiolo County Government 61.6 38.4
18. County Government of Narok 60.8 39.2
19. Makueni County Government 59.9 40.1
20. Uasin Gishu County Government 59.3 40.7
21. Elgeyo Marakwet County Government 59.0 41.0
22. Taita Taveta County Government 58.5 41.5
23. Samburu County Government 57.2 42.8
24. Nyandarua County Government 56.5 43.5
25. Laikipia County Government 56.4 43.6
26. Kajiado County Government 56.3 43.7
27. Kirinyaga County Government 55.8 44.2
28. Siaya County Government 55.0 45.058
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
30. Turkana County Government 53.5 46.5
31. Nakuru County Government 52.9 47.1
32. Homabay County Government 51.0 49.0
33. Murang’a County Government 50.5 49.5
34. Garissa County Government 50.0 50.0
35. Lamu County Government 49.0 51.0
36. Machakos County Government 48.8 51.2
37. Kakamega County government 48.0 52.0
38. Vihiga County Government 47.0 53.0
39. Migori County Government 42.0 58.0
40. Nairobi County Government. 41.3 58.7
41. Meru County Government 39.3 0.7
42 Kiambu County Government 34.0 36.0
43. Kitui County Government 33.1 66.9
44. Marsabit County Government. 23.7 76.3
Average Scores (%) 58.5% 44.5%
From the information above, the average compliance level of the County 
Executives is 58.5% which is considered non-compliant and a moderate risk of 
44.5%.
Table 10: Compliance and Risk Scores of County Assemblies
No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
1. Siaya County Assembly 89.0 11.0
2. Kericho County Assembly 77.7 22.3
3. Garissa County Assembly 76.0 24.0
4. Nandi County Assembly 74.4 25.6
5. Kilifi County Assembly 71.0 29.0
6. Elgeyo Marakwet County Assembly 70.8 29.2
7. Bungoma County Assembly 69.0 31.0
8. Murang’a County Assembly 67.5 32.5
9. Nyandarua County Assembly 67.0 33.0
10. Kwale County Assembly 67.0 33.0
11. Kajiado County Assembly 65.8 24.259
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
12. Wajir County Assembly 65.6 34.4
13. Baringo County Assembly 64.0 36.0
14. Trans Nzoia County Assembly 63.4 36.6
15. Tharaka Nithi County Assembly 63.0 33.0
16. Nakuru County Assembly  62.8 37.2
17. West Pokot County Assembly 62.0 38.0
18. Uasin Gishu County Assembly 61.1 38.9
19. Tana River County Assembly 61.0 39.0
20. Turkana County Assembly 60.7 39.3
21. Nyamira County Assembly 60.2 39.8
22. Laikipia County Assembly 59.8 40.8
23. Kitui County Assembly 59.1 40.9
24. Taita Taveta County Assembly 59.0 41.0
25. Marsabit County Assembly 57.4 42.6
26. Nairobi County Assembly 57.0 43.0
27. Bomet County Assembly 54.5 45.5
28. Kirinyaga County Assembly 53.0 47.0
29. Migori County Assembly 53.0 47.0
30. Busia County Assembly 53.0 47.0
31. Mombasa County Assembly 51.0 49.0
32. Kakamega County Assembly 51.0 49.0
33. Homabay County Assembly 50.0 50.0
34. Vihiga County Assembly 47.0 53.0
35. Nyeri County Assembly 44.8 58.2
36. Meru County Assembly 43.0 57.0
37. Embu County Assembly 39.9 60.1
38. Lamu County Assembly 39.0 61.0
39. Isiolo County Assembly 36.9 63.1
40. County Assembly of Narok 36.5 63.5
41 Samburu County Assembly 36.2 63.8
42. Makueni County Assembly 35.0 75.0
43. Kiambu County Assembly 32.5 67.5
44. Machakos County Assembly 20.3 79.7
Average Scores (%) 56.6% 43.4%60
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 From the table above, the compliance level of the County Assemblies audited 
is 56.6% while the risk level is 43.4%. 
The overall compliance level based on the available data on the PEs that were 
audited during year is 55.0% which is rated as average compliance, while the 
risk rating is 45.0% which is rated as moderate.  A general finding in almost 
all the PEs that were audited was that the compliance rating of procurement 
processes was slightly higher compared with compliance rating of the contract 
management processes.
Some of the common strengths that were identified in the procurement system 
in most of the PEs that were audited included establishment of Procurement 
Functions; establishment various committees on procurement processes such 
tender opening and evaluation committees; Heads of Procurement Functions 
prepared Professional Opinions and submitted them to the Accounting Officer 
and the PEs used the standard tender documents.  On the other hand, some of 
the common weaknesses found were:  
(i) Failure to develop internal procurement and asset disposal operations 
manual to guide making of decisions on procurement activities as required 
by Section 45(1) of the Act. The PEs which had Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Manual/policies, the manuals/policies were not aligned with the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Regulations, 2020. 
(ii) Failure to maintain complete individual procurement and contract files with 
all the relevant procurement and contract records as envisaged by the Public 
Procurement Records Management Procedures Manual (2010). Documents 
were filed in different files and were kept by different departments making 
their retrieval cumbersome and time consuming. 
(iii) Failure to make prompt payments on completed contracts thus risking 
loss of public funds in the event the contractors invoked the provisions of 
Section 140 of the Act on overdue payments.
(iv) Failure by heads of Procurement Functions to prepare monthly progress 
reports on procurement contracts pursuant to Section 152 of the Act and 
Regulation 140 of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Regulations, 
2020 to update the Accounting Officers on implementation of contracts 
under them. 
(v) Failure to publicize contract awards as required by Section 138 of the Act 
and Regulations, PPRA Circular No.1/2021 of 22nd April 2021 and Executive 
Order No. 2 of 28th June, 2018. 
(vi) Failure by Accounting Officers to appoint Disposal Committees as envisaged 
by Section 163 of the Act and Regulation 177 despite having asset that 
were not being used/obsolete asset /inactive Disposal Committees leading 
to accumulation of obsolete/unserviceable assets. 61
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (c) Procurement Reviews
A procurement review is a comprehensive and detailed audit of the procurement 
and asset disposal activities of a procuring entity for a specified period of time 
to ascertain their level of compliance with the Public Procurement Law. The 
key indicators used in procurement reviews were institutional arrangements, 
procurement and asset disposal procedures, and inventory management. 
During the year, the Authority conducted compliance monitoring reviews in 11 
procuring entities. The compliance and risk scores for the 11 PEs are presented 
in the table below.
Table 11: Compliance Reviews Rating and Risk Scores
No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
1. Kitale National Polytechnic 80.3 19.7
2. New Kenya Cooperative Creameries Ltd 77.5 22.5
3. Kenya Revenue Authority 64.3  35.7
4. Tambach Teachers College 60.0 40
5. Technical University of Kenya 55.0 45.0
6. University of Kabianga 51.3 48.7
7. University of Nairobi 51.2 48.8
8. Kibabii University of Science and 
Technology51.0 49.0
9. Taita Taveta University 50.0 50.0
10. Nzoia Water Services Co. Ltd 44.0 56.0
11. Kericho Teachers College 22.0 78.0
Average Score (%) 52.9% 47.1%
From the above information, the average compliance score for the eleven PEs 
that were reviewed was 52.9% which is indication of average compliant with the 
Public Procurement Law, with a corresponding moderate risk level of 47.9%. 
The eleven PEs had strengths in such areas as; establishment of Procurement 
Functions, undertaking annual procurement planning, use of standard tender 
documents, appointment of tender opening and evaluation committees, 
preparation of tender opening and evaluation reports, preparation of 
professional opinions by heads of Procurement Functions and use of standard 
stores records like S11 and S13.   
The PEs had common weaknesses which included failure to customize the tender 
documents appropriately before issuing them to bidders, failure by tender 
opening committees to adhere to some of the tender opening procedures like 62
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 recording the number of pages for all the tender documents received, failure 
by the evaluation committees to adhere to some of the evaluation procedures 
such as evaluating tenders independently and preparation of individual scores 
sheets.  
(d) Follow-Ups on Implementation of Recommendations 
During the year, the Authority conducted four follow-up assessments at the 
Kenya Coast National Polytechnic, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, Narok 
County Government and Kerio Valley Development Authority.  The purpose of 
the follow-ups was to gauge the extent to which the PE had implemented the 
recommendations made by Authority to address the non-compliance issues that 
were identified in their procurement system in the past compliance monitoring. 
The table below presents the level of implementation of the recommendations 
of the Authority by the four (4) PEs that were considered in the follow-ups. 
Table 12: Level of Implementation of Recommendations
No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
1. Narok County Government 90.9 9.1
2. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 70.0 30.0
3. Kerio Valley Development Authority 70.0 30.0
4. Kenya Coast National Polytechnic 50.0 50.0
Average Scores (%) 70.2% 29.8%
From the follow-ups, the PEs attained an average compliance level of 70.2% 
with a corresponding risk score of 29.8%. This implied that on average the 
PEs had implemented 70.2% of the recommendations while 29.8% of the 
recommendations were not implemented. All the PEs except Kenya Coast 
National Polytechnic fairly implemented the recommendations made by the 
Authority.  
(e) Compliance Monitoring through Procurement Inspections
Section 43 of the Act mandates the Authority to conduct procurement inspection 
to measures the level of compliance of a procuring entity with the Procurement 
Law. The key indicators used in the inspections includes establishment of 
procurement function, management of procurement records, inventory 
management, appointment of disposal committees, procurement plans and 
security of tender documents submitted by the bidders. During the year under 
review, the Authority conducted four compliance inspections in secondary 
schools as presented in the table below. 63
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table 13: Compliance Inspections Rating
No. Procuring Entity  Rating
Compliance 
Score (%)Risks 
Score (%)
1. Karbanet Boys High School 73.0 27.0
2. Sharif Nasir Girls’ High School 46.0 54.0
3. Nakuru Girls’ High School 34.9 65.1
4. Eldama Ravine Girls’ High School 27.0 73.0
Average (%) 45.2% 54.8%
From the above table, the aggregate compliance level for the four PEs where 
procurement inspections were conducted is 45.2% with a corresponding risk 
level of 54.8%. If the compliance levels are low, then procurement performance 
is low.  Kabarnet Boys High School had the highest compliance rating of 
73.0%, which may be attributed to a better procurement system/structure 
characterized with procurement planning, properly maintained procurement 
records, and updated inventory management records. However, the school had 
some weaknesses such as failure to publicize contract awards and submission 
of reports on contract awards to the Authority. 
The other Schools with low compliance ratings and high-risk ratings had common 
weaknesses in its procurement systems which included failure by the schools to 
assign an officer to be responsible for managing procurement records, failure 
to maintain tender registers, failure to undertake stock takings and failure to 
maintain updated store records as evidenced by variance between the ledger 
balances and physical balances for the sampled items.
2.3 Strategic Objective 2: To Enhance Enforcement of the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Standards
The Authority is mandated under sections 9 and 35 of the Act to act on, including 
investigation of complaints received on public procurement and asset disposal 
proceedings, enforce any 
standards developed under the Act.
2.3.1 Complaints Management
The Authority is committed to ensure that stakeholders complaints on public 
procurement and asset disposal matters are managed and resolved through 
an efficient, effective, accountable, transparent and fair process. resolution of 
complaints lodged by stakeholders. The Authority recognizes that effective 
complaints management is essential in strengthening the performance of the 
public procurement system. 64
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 During the year, the Authority handled 483 complaints, comprising of 300 
received within the year and 183 carried forward from the previous year, 
2019/2020. Out of this, 435 complaints were resolved while 48 were at different 
stages of being resolved as at the end of the financial year, as presented in the 
table below. 
Table 14: Status of Complaints Handled
Category of 
PEComplaints Handled in 2020/2021 Total Status of 
Complaints
2019/
2020Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 Q 4 Resolved Pending
State 
Corporations 
and SAGAs72 67 17 29 18 203 183 20
County 
Governments 36 32 3 24 7 102 91 11
Ministries 
and State 
Departments31 9 4 19 4 67 60 7
Public 
Universities & 
Colleges12 13 2 3 3 33 30 3
Constitutional 
Commissions8 10 1 3 9 31 25 6
Technical 
Training 
Institutions & 
Schools13 4 6 4 2 29 28 1
NGCDFs 5 1 2 1 1 10 10 0
County 
Assemblies7 0 0 1 0 8 8 0
Total 184 136 35 84 44 483 435 48
The complaints are further summarised by category of procuring entities as 
presented in the table below. From the table, majority of the complaints were on 
procurement and asset disposal processes undertaken by State Corporations 
at 42%, followed by County Governments, 21.1%, and Ministries & State 
Departments, at 13.9%.65
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table 15: Distribution of Complaints by Procuring Entities
Category of PE Complaints 
HandledPercent 
State Corporations 203 42.0%
County Governments 102 21.1%
Ministries and State Departments 67 13.9%
Public Universities & Colleges 33 6.8%
Constitutional Commissions 31 6.4%
Technical Training Institutions & Schools 29 6.0%
NGCDFs 10 2.1%
County Assemblies 8 1.7%
Total 483 100.0%
On nature of complaints received during the year, 102 were on flaws in tender 
evaluation and development of specifications, followed by request for review 
of procurement processes at 55, allegations of corruption during procurement 
proceedings at 43, and delayed payments at 38, amongst others, as presented 
in the figure below.
Figure 2:Nature of Complaints Received66
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 2.3.2  Investigations Undertaken
During the period under review, the Authority commenced 10 investigations as 
shown in the table below. As at the end of the financial year, 9 investigations had 
been completed while one was still ongoing, as presented in the table below.
Table 16: Investigations Undertaken 
No. Procuring Entity Complainant/
AgencyNature of 
ComplaintStatus
1. Kenya Electricity 
Transmission 
Company 
(KETRACO)Getrio 
Insurance 
Brokers 
LimitedAlleged 
Irregularities in 
the processing 
for Tender Nos. 
KETRACO/
PT/002/2019-2020 
and KETRACO/
PT/006/2020 
- Provision of 
Insurance ServicesCompleted
2. Kenya Medical 
Supplies Agency 
(KEMSA)The Senate Alleged Irregular 
Procurement 
Activities of the 
Kenya Medical 
Supplies Authority 
(KEMSA) 
One Hundred 
and Sixteen (116) 
TendersCompleted
3. Nzoia Water Ser -
vices Company 
LimitedAg. Managing 
Director
Nzoia Water 
Services 
Company 
LimitedAlleged Irregular 
Processing and 
Award of Tender 
for Development, 
Installation and 
Maintenance of 
Integrated Soft -
ware – RFP No. 
PQ/01/2017 - 2018Completed
4. Kaimosi Univer -
sity CollegeAnonymous Alleged abuse of 
Office and Irregular 
Award of TendersCompleted
5. Kimilili NGCDF 
CommitteeBryan Khaem -
ba, Kamau and 
Company 
AdvocatesInvestigation into 
Execution of CDF 
ProjectsCompleted 
report67
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Procuring Entity Complainant/
AgencyNature of 
ComplaintStatus
6. Moi Teaching and 
Referral HospitalTonasco Insaat 
Anonim Sirketi 
ltdIrregular 
processing of 
TendersCompleted 
and Report 
shared 
with the 
procuring 
entity and 
EACC, DCI, 
AG, ODPP .
7. Kenya Vision 
2030 Delivery 
SecretariatDirector 
General 
Vision 2030 
SecretariatIrregularities in 
processing of 
tenders/quotationsCompleted 
and Draft re -
port shared 
with PE for 
response
8. Central Bank of 
KenyaISMS 
Control Case 
International 
LtdIrregularities in 
procurement of 
integrated security 
management 
security systemCompleted 
and Report 
shared with 
PE
9. Kenya Electricity 
Transmission 
Company 
(KETRACO)Getrio 
Insurance 
Brokers 
LimitedAlleged 
Irregularities in 
the processing 
for Tender Nos. 
KETRACO/
PT/002/2019-2020 
and KETRACO/
PT/006/2020 
- Provision of 
Insurance ServicesReport 
shared with 
PE and DCI, 
EACC
10. Athi Water Works 
Development 
AgencyBenedict 
Kabugi 
NdunguIrregular 
Termination 
of Tender No. 
WWDA/GOK/
DESTP/W-
28/2020 – 
Rehabilitation 
and Expansion 
of Dandora 
Estate Sewerage 
Treatment PlantOngoing.68
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 2.3.3 Debarment 
Section 41 of the Act mandates the Regulatory Board to debar suppliers/
contractors from participating in public procurement and asset disposal 
proceedings on various grounds. During the year, the Regulatory Board 
constituted a Debarment Committee (DC) to hear and determine all debarment 
cases. The Debarment and the Secretariat were trained by Kenya School of 
Law between 22nd to 23rd February, 2021 on processes and procedures for 
conducting debarment operations. The Debarment Committee during the year, 
handled eight requests for debarment as summarized in the table below.
Table 17: Details of Debarment Cases and Status
No. Applica -
tion No.Case Details Ground 
For Debar -
mentStatus and 
Commencement
Debarred 
/Not 
DebarredCommence -
ment
1. Applica -
tion No. 1 
and 2 con -
solidated 
of 2021The Office of 
Auditor 
General and 
Dr. Nzai 
(APPLICANTS)
VS
 EAA CO. LTD
(RESPOND -
ENT)a) 
Present -
ing forged 
documents 
during 
tendering
b) 
Present -
ing false 
informa -
tion during 
tenderingDebarred 
for 3yearsCommencing 
23rd June, 
2021.
Debarment 
challenged in 
the High Court.
2. Applica -
tion No.3 
and 4 con -
solidated 
of 2021The Office of 
Auditor Gener -
al and Dr. Nzai 
(APPLICANTS)
 VS
ATJ LTD 
(RESPOND -
ENT)a) 
Present -
ing forged 
documents
b) 
Presenting 
false docu -
mentsDebarred 
for 3 
years. 
(2nd june,
2021)However, there 
is High Court 
petition No. 
E191 of 2021 
which gave 
temporary or -
ders stopping 
the DC from 
proceeding 
with the sub -
ject matter, a 
day before the 
Decision was 
communicated 
to the parties.69
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Applica -
tion No.Case Details Ground 
For Debar -
mentStatus and 
Commencement
Debarred 
/Not 
DebarredCommence -
ment
3. Applica -
tion No.5 
of 2021Mr. Benard 
Kabugi 
(APPLICANT)
 VS
China 
Gezhouba 
Group of 
Companies
(RESPOND -
ENT)Debarred 
by world 
bankNot 
debarredMatter with -
drawn by 
applicant.
Reason:
i) the applicant 
lost interest
ii) claims 
matter handled 
by PPRA as 
complaint
4. Applica -
tion No. 6 
of 2021Nyeri Water 
and Sewerage 
Company ltd 
(APPLICANT)
 VS
 Stemar 
Agencies ltd 
(RESPOND -
ENT)Presented 
an invalid/
forged 
AGPO 
certificate.Debarred 
for 3 yearsCommencing 
on 23rd June, 
2021
5. Applica -
tion No.7Coast De -
velopment 
Authority (AP -
PLICANT)
 VS
M/S Business 
Machines ltd 
(RESPOND -
ENT)The 
respond -
ent was 
paid, but 
failed to 
the deliver 
the goods.Not 
debarredThe DC 
determined 
that there 
was no prima 
facie case as 
applicant did 
not provide 
evidence to 
support the 
allegations.
6. Applica -
tion No. 8 
of 2021Technical 
University of 
Mombasa 
(APPLICANT)
 VS
Integrated 
Technologies 
& Systems ltd 
(RESPOND -
ENT)The re -
spondent 
was paid, 
but did not 
deliver the 
goodsNot 
debarredThe DC de -
termined that 
there was no 
prima facie 
case as the 
applicant did 
not provide 
the evidence 
to support the 
allegations70
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Applica -
tion No.Case Details Ground 
For Debar -
mentStatus and 
Commencement
Debarred 
/Not 
DebarredCommence -
ment
7. Applica -
tion No.9 
of 2021Mr. Benedict 
Kabugi 
(APPLICANT)
VS
Justnice Ltd 
(Respondent)Obtaining 
confiden -
tial infor -
mation 
irregularly 
during 
tendering 
process.Not 
debarredThe DC de -
termined that 
there was no 
prima facie 
case as the 
applicant did 
not provide 
the evidence 
to support the 
allegations
8. Applica -
tion No.10 
of 2021Mr. Benedict 
Kabugi 
(APPLICANT)
VS
Sinotec 
Company 
Limited (both 
China and 
Kenya branch)
(REPOND -
ENT)The re -
spondent 
has been 
debarred 
by African 
Develop -
ment Bank.Not 
debarredThe DC 
determined 
that there was 
no prima facie 
case as the 
applicant did 
not provide 
the evidence 
to support the 
allegations
2.4 Strategic Objective 3: To Conduct Quality Research 
on Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Issues for 
Enhanced Service Delivery
2.4.1 Issuance of Market Price Reference Guide 
The Authority in collaboration with the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 
(KNBS) through a memorandum of agreement, has been undertaking surveys on 
prevailing market prices for standard goods and services to inform preparation 
of market price index for use by the procuring entities. The market price surveys 
are normally conducted in Nairobi, Mombasa, Kisumu, Eldoret and Bungoma 
towns. 
During the year, the Authority prepared and published two (2) market price 
index. In addition, the Authority prepared the third market price index report, 
which was shared with the National Treasury for comments and application. The 
published market price reference guide reports are available in the website 71
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 www.ppra.go.ke for reference by all stakeholders. The Authority due to financial 
constraints following budget cuts, did not undertake additional two market 
surveys as envisaged.
In order to ensure that changes in the procurement environment and in the 
specifications of the items whose prices are collected are taken into account, 
the Authority commenced the process of reviewing the list of the common user 
items including the methodology of undertaking the assignment. A technical 
committee consisting of officers drawn from different government agencies has 
since been formed with the aim of delivering a comprehensive list of standard 
goods and services accompanied by detailed specifications, performance 
standards and identification codes. The Committee has met once in March, 2021 
to deliberate on the scope of the assignment, as well as drawing a roadmap for 
the same.
2.5  Strategic Objective 4: To Strengthen the Public 
Procurement and Asset Disposal Legal and Regulatory 
Framework
The Authority is mandated under section 9 of the Act to provide advisory 
services and technical support upon request; monitor, evaluate and report on 
the performance of the public procurement and asset disposal system; as well 
as conduct research on the system. 
2.5.1 Provision of Advisory Services
The Authority receives requests for advice in either written form, telephone calls 
or walk-ins (visits to the Authority’s offices). During the period under review, the 
Authority received 126 requests for advice and issued written response letters 
to the concerned stakeholders, as presented in the table below. 
Table 18:Quarterly Distribution of Requests for Advice
Category of Procuring Entity Requests for Advice Handled
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Total
State Corporations and SAGAs 7 9 15 11 42
Commissions and Independent Offices 4 0 2 4 10
Ministries and State Departments 3 4 5 1 13
Public Universities and Colleges 4 5 3 2 14
County Executives 3 2 3 3 11
County Assemblies 2 2 0 2 6
Other Stakeholders 10 6 4 10 30
Total 33 28 32 33 12672
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (a) Duration of Processing of Requests for Advice
The table below presents the summary of duration taken by the Authority to 
issue written advice to different stakeholders that made such requests. Majority 
of the requests (98) were handled within 30 days, whereas the remaining 28 
were issued after 30 days due to consultations to facilitate issuance of informed 
advice, as presented in the table below.
 
Table 19: Duration of Issuance of Requests for Advice by quarters
Range (Days) Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Total
1 – 15 7 9 24 17 57
15 – 30 16 7 5 13 41
30 + 10 12 3 3 28
Total 33 28 32 30 126
(b) Major areas of Requests for Advice
The most common areas where different stakeholders sought advice included:
(a) Contract management (reporting, variation/ Amendment, extension, 
expiry); including contract variations and amendments owing to delays in 
finalizing fresh procurement proceedings.
(b) Management of procurement processes where only a single bid was 
received.
(c) Seeking concurrence to terminate procurement proceedings after entities 
had issued notification letters.
(d) Use and customization of the new standard tender documents.  
(e) Composition of various committees considering the IFMIS platform.
(f) Choice of procurement methods for different types of procurements.
2.5.2  Requests for Approval of Alternative Selection Method for  
 Consultancy Services
Pursuant to Section 124 (15) of the Act, the Authority is mandated to approve 
requests from procuring entities in cases where an Alternative Selection 
Method for procurement of consultancy services is selected. During the year, 
the Authority received requests from the following institutions: 
(a) County Government of Trans Nzoia for procurement of consultancy 
services in the management and supervision of construction of proposed 
Kitale Multi –Storey business complex on LR. 2116/601, Kitale Municipality. 
However, the approval was not granted and were advised to source the 
services through a competitive process in accordance with the Act.73
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (b) Ministry of Labour and Social Protection – State Department for Labour for 
the procurement of consultancy services for a technical advisor on Labour 
market observatory. The approval was not granted since the request did 
not fulfil the conditions for se of SSS method as outlined under section 
124(12) of the Act 
(c) Athi Water Works Development Agency made the following requests for 
use of Single source selection method:
(i) Request for approval of use of single source selection method for 
consultancy services for detailed designs supervision and coordination 
of works for the Northern Collector System Raw Water and treated 
water pipelines Phase B. Contract No. AWSB/WaSSIP AF/COMP .1/
CS-01/2013. The approval was not granted as the procuring entity 
intended to procure the existing Consultant to undertake supervision 
services from January 2020 up to 30th April, 2021, whereas the 
approval was sought in October, 2020. In this regard, pursuant to 
Section 69(2) of the Act the request was declined.
(ii) Request for approval for use of single source selection method for 
consultancy services for the implementation of the Nairobi City 
Distribution network modification project. The approval was not 
granted since the proposed consultancy was to run up to October, 
2020, which was the same period the request for approval for use 
of single source selection method was made to the Authority. The 
request was therefore declined pursuant to Section 69(2) of the Act.
(iii) Request for approval for use of single source selection method for 
conceptual design, design and build tender documentation and 
construction for the High level Kigoro water Treatment Plant. The 
approval was not granted since it was noted that the entity intended 
to procure the existing consultancy to undertake supervision services 
from November 2018 up to November 2020. The request was 
therefore declined pursuant to Section 69(2) of the Act.
(d) Ministry of Petroleum and Mining (State Department for Petroleum): 
Request for approval to use single source selection method for consultancy 
services to modernize the national upstream data centre (NDC) of Kenya. 
The approval was not granted because the entity did not demonstrate that 
engaging the consultant through single source selection presents a clear 
advantage over competition as required by Section 124(12) of the Act.
(e) County Government of Trans Nzoia: Request for use of single selection for 
procurement of consultancy services in the management and 
supervision of construction of proposed Kitale Multistorey Business 
Complex on LR.NO.2116/601, Kitale Municipality. The approval was not 
granted since the Contract referred had been executed.74
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (f) State department for Trade and Enterprises Development: Requested for 
approval to use single source selection method of individual consultants to 
offer technical advisory services towards the negotiations for the proposed 
Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between Kenya and the United States of 
America, on 22nd January 2021. The Authority after considering the 
requests and the justification for use of the method, granted an approval 
on 1st February 2021.
(g) County Assembly of Kisumu: Requested for approval to use quality-based 
selection method (QBS) on 19th January 2021. The Authority allowed the 
use of the QBS and advised you adhere to the provisions of Part X of both 
the Act and the Regulations; and in particular Section 124(7) of the Act 
read together with Regulation 123 of the Regulations which has set out the 
procedure for QBS.
(h) Kenya Forestry Research Institute: Requested for approval to use least 
cost selection method 10th March, 2021, for development of ERP systems 
as the appropriate given that ERP systems are mainly procured from 
well-established firms through accredited country vendor. The Authority 
considered request and allowed that the procuring entity may explore use 
of Least Cost Selection method in subject procurement.
(i) The Office of Attorney General and Department of Justice requested for 
approval to use single source selection method to procure consultancy 
services in respect of civil appeal application No. E163 of 2021: the 
Honourable Attorney General vs David Ndii & 73 others. The request was 
granted considering that the services were urgently needed and the matter 
constituted exceptional cases/circumstances.
(j) The Office of Attorney General and Department of Justice sought the 
use of single source selection method for    request for proposal: Legal 
services– Walam Energy Vs Republic of Kenya (ICSID ARB.15/7): Application 
for Annulment (R202000079). The request was granted considering 
the emergency of the matter and taking into account the experience, 
qualifications and exceptional worthy of the consultants to be engaged.
(k) The Kenya Airports Authority requested for approval to use single source 
selection method for consultancy services. The approval was not granted 
as the request did not fulfil the conditions for use of single source selection 
method as outlined under Section 124 (12) of the Act and Regulation 129 
(1) of the Regulations.
2.5.3 Request for Transfer of Procurement Responsibility
Pursuant to 52(1) of the Act, the Authority shall have power to transfer the 
procuring responsibility of a procuring entity to another procuring entity 75
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 or procuring agent in the event of delay or in such other circumstances as 
prescribed in the Regulations. Further, Section 52 (2) of the Act provides that a 
procuring entity can make arrangements to enable another procuring entity to 
carry out the procurement or part of the procurement, on its behalf subject to 
the approval of the governing body of the organ or entity, where applicable or 
upon recommendation of the Authority. 
During the year, the Authority addressed the following requests for transfer of 
procurement responsibility:
(a) County Assembly of Meru to transfer the procuring responsibility of the 
land for the construction of the speaker’s residence to County Service 
Delivery Coordinating Unit. The request was granted. 
(b) Kenya power & Lighting Co. PLC to transfer the procurement responsibility 
of procuring lawyers to advise on power purchase agreements to the Office 
of the Attorney General. The request was granted given that the intention 
was consistent to the provisions of Circular Ref: AG/CONF/6/E/247VOL II 
issued by the Office of the Attorney General (AOG) on the engagement of 
private legal services by Government Ministries and State Departments.
2.5.4  Strengthening the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal  
 Regulatory Framework
(a) Mandatory Reporting Requirements for Procuring Entities 
The Authority noted that, despite the requirements of the Act and 
Regulations on mandatory reporting and the directives contained in 
the Executive Order No. 2 of 2018 and PPRA Circular No. 1/2016, most 
procuring entities have failed to submit the reports and to publish details 
of the required information as directed.
To that effect, on 22nd April, 2021, the Authority brought to the attention of 
all procuring entities the various reports to be submitted to the Authority 
as required under the Act and the Regulations,2020; and to be published 
in the Public Procurement Information Portal (PPIP), vide PPRA Circular No. 
01/2021. The reporting formats accompanying the Circular are available in 
the Authority’s website: www.ppra.go.ke.
(b) Insurance of Standard Tender Documents & Formats Aligned to the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 and Regulations, 
2020
Section 9(1)(f), 58 and 70 of the Act vest the responsibility of development 
and issuance of standard bid/tender documents and formats with the 
Authority. The Authority with technical support from GIZ reviewed, updated 
and developed new Standard tender documents (STDs) and Formats in 76
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 consideration of changes in the Act , the Regulations and international best 
practices.
Pursuant to Section 58(10) and 70(1) of the Act, it is mandatory for all 
procuring entities to use the standard bid/tender documents and formats 
in their procurement and asset disposal activities. In that regard, the 
Authority brought to the attention of all procuring entities the availability 
of the new standard bid/tender documents and formats via PPRA Circular 
No. 02/2021 of 22nd April, 2021.  The same can be accessed from the 
Authority’s website  www.ppra.go.ke or through the link http://ppra.go.ke/
standard-tender-documents.
(c) Roll-out of the Upgraded Public Procurement Information Portal (PPIP)
The Authority pursuant to the provisions of Sections 96(3)(a) & 138 of the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act,2015 and Regulations 85(2) 
and 131 of the Regulations 2020 and the Executive Order No. 2 of 2018 
developed and rolled out the Public Procurement   Information Portal 
(PPIP) to facilitate publication of tendering opportunities and details of all 
contracts awarded by procuring entities. 
To ensure that the Portal (PPIP) is optimized and meets new requirements 
suggested by users and stakeholders, the Authority with of the support of 
the Public Financial Management Reforms program engaged a consultant 
to upgrade the Portal. The upgrade process was completed followed by a 
pilot phase with users from 19 procuring entities. The Authority brought 
to the attention of all procuring entity users the planned roll-out of the 
new Portal via PPRA Circular No. 03/2021 of 17th May ,2021. The Portal is 
available for access by all stakeholders through https://tenders.go.ke. 
2.6 Strategic Objective 5: To Equip Persons involved in Public 
Procurement with Requisite Knowledge and Skills on Public 
Procurement and Asset Disposal
The Authority is mandated under section 9 of the Act to provide of technical 
support and training to procuring entities upon request. During the year, the 
Authority received and addressed the following requests for technical support:77
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table 20: Technical Support and Trainings Offered
Source of Request Nature of Request Nature of Support/Status
Teachers Service 
CommissionTechnical support in the 
development of a public 
procurement manual.Manual reviewed and 
comments shared 
Kenya National 
Highways AuthoritySensitization of Board 
members on the Public 
Procurement and 
Disposal Act, 2015 and 
Regulations, 2020.The training was not 
conducted due to short 
of staff capacity in the 
Authority
Ministry of 
Environment and 
ForestrySupported the 
Multi-Agency Team 
to develop the best 
methods and modalities 
for disposal of mature 
and over mature forest 
plantations.Officer nominated and 
participated in the 
meetings
State Department 
for Trade and 
Enterprise 
DevelopmentRequest for technical 
assistance in the 
development of an online 
Local Content Monitoring 
and Management Tool to 
be used by all procuring 
entities. A team of three officers 
were appointed and 
participated in the 
meetings.
Kenya National 
Bureau of StatisticsTraining of Board 
of Directors and 
Management on public 
procurement and asset 
disposal legal framework.Training conducted
Kenya Wildlife 
ServiceTraining of senior 
management team 
and Supply Chain 
Management staff on the 
New Public Procurement 
and Asset Disposal 
Regulations, 2020.Training conducted
Unclaimed Financial 
Assets AuthorityOffered support in the 
review and alignment 
of your procurement 
manual with the new 
Public Procurement and 
Asset Regulations 2020.Offered support in the 
review and alignment 
of your procurement 
manual with the new 
Public Procurement and 
Asset Regulations 2020 
from18th - 21st January, 
2021  Naivasha78
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Source of Request Nature of Request Nature of Support/Status
Facilitated training on 
procurement on the new 
Public Procurement and 
Asset Regulations 2020 
for staff. Facilitated training on 
procurement on the new 
Public Procurement and 
Asset Regulations 2020 
for staff from  25th -29th 
January, 2021,  Naivasha
Facilitated training on 
procurement on the new 
Public Procurement and 
Asset Regulations 2020 
for  the management and  
Board MembersFacilitated training on 
procurement on the new 
Public Procurement and 
Asset Regulations 2020 
for  the management and  
Board Members from 
1st to 5th February, 2021, 
Mombasa
The Judiciary/ 
Judiciary Training 
InstituteFacilitation of  a 
session during the 
anti-Corruption, Money 
Laundering And Asset 
Recovery Training For 
Judges Facilitated a session virtual 
from 27th -28th January, 
2021 covering:  
•	 corruption	in	
infrastructure 
procurement and 
projects 
•	 Opportunities	and	
access to marginalized 
quotas in public 
procurement processes
Numerical 
Machining Complex 
LimitedTechnical assistance in 
reviewing supply chain 
management manual.Postponed 
Kenya Plant Health 
Inspectorate Service Technical support in 
reviewing of procurement 
procedure Policy. Offered support in the 
review and alignment 
of your procurement 
procedure policy with the 
Act and the new Public 
Procurement and Asset 
Regulations 2020 from 
26th - 29th January, 2021
NG-CDF Kesses 
constituency   Training of Project 
Management 
Committees (PMCs) on 
public procurement 
processTraining of the Project 
Management Committee 
(PMC)NG-CDF Kesses 
Constituency from  26th - 
29th January, 202179
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Source of Request Nature of Request Nature of Support/Status
Council of 
Governors  To participate in 
Validation of the ‘Bidders’ 
Guidebook – A Reference 
Guide for Women, Youth 
and PWDs PPRA reviewed the 
Bidders’ Guidebook 
– A Reference Guide 
for Women, Youth and 
PWDs and shared the 
comments/input with 
Council of Governors 
on16th February, 2021
The National 
Treasury and 
Planning - State 
Department for 
Planning Capacity building of staff 
on public procurement 
and asset disposal 
procedures in the Act 
and Regulations, 2020.Facilitated training on 
public procurement and 
asset disposal procedures 
in the Act and Regulations, 
2020 for the state 
department staff on 5th 
February, 2021, Mombasa
The Judiciary Sensitization of staff on 
contract management.Not facilitated due to 
prior planned programs/ 
activities
Kenya Maritime 
AuthorityTechnical support in the 
development of supply 
chain management policy 
& procedures manual.Officers nominated 
and supported the 
development of the policy 
and manual
Ethics and 
Anti-Corruption 
CommissionCapacity building of 
staff on the Act and 
Regulations, 2020.Facilitated training on 
public procurement 
and asset disposal 
procedures in the Act 
and Regulations, 2020 
for the Commissioners, 
Directors, and Heads of 
Departments from 22nd 
-26th February, 2021
Training for reporting 
and data management 
officers on public 
procurement.Training was conducted 
between 18th and 21st May, 
202180
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Source of Request Nature of Request Nature of Support/Status
Baringo Technical 
Teachers CollegeTraining of staff 
& sensitization of 
suppliers on public 
procurement and asset 
disposal processes and 
procedures.Conducted the training 
of staff & sensitization 
of suppliers on public 
procurement and asset 
disposal processes and 
procedures as outlined in 
the Act and Regulations, 
2020 from 16th - 17th March 
2021 at  Baringo Technical 
Teachers College 
Kabarnet
Technical & 
Vocational 
Education Training 
AuthorityTechnical support in 
the review of TVET 
Leadership and 
management training 
manual.Officer nominated and 
offered support in the 
review of TVET Leadership 
and management training 
manual from  15th  - 16th 
February, 2021
Machakos University Induction of Council 
Members on public 
procurement and asset 
disposal procedures.Facilitated training on 
public procurement 
and asset disposal 
procedures in the Act and 
Regulations, 2020 for the 
Council Members on 26th 
February, 2021 Machakos
Commission on 
Administrative 
JusticeTechnical support in the 
development of internal 
procurement and asset 
disposal manual.Officers nominated 
and supported the 
development of the 
manual.
Women Enterprise 
FundSensitization of staff on 
public procurement 
and asset disposal 
procedures and 
processes.Postponed 
Commission for 
University EducationCapacity building and 
training of middle-level 
members of staff on 
procurement and asset 
disposal procedures.Conducted training on 
public procurement and 
asset disposal Act 2015 
and Public Procurement 
and Asset Regulations 
2020 for Middle-Level 
Management staff on  24th 
February, 2021 at Maasai 
Technical Institute Kajiado81
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Source of Request Nature of Request Nature of Support/Status
County Assembly of 
MachakosTraining of County 
Assembly Service Board 
members and heads 
of departments on 
procurement and asset 
disposal procedures and 
processes.Conducted training on Act  
and contract management 
on 4th March, 2021 
Mombasa
Office of the 
Auditor GeneralTraining of staff on the 
Act and Regulations, 
2020.Conducted training on 
and Regulations, 2020 
from 7th to 9th June 2021at 
Maazoni Lodge. 
Conducted training on 
and Regulations, 2020 
from 21st to 23rd June 
2021at Maazoni Lodge.
County Assembly 
Forum (CAF)Facilitation of a session 
during the forum 
on Straitening Intra-
Governmental Relations 
in Samburu County.Training conducted
Kenya National 
Bureau of StatisticsFacilitation during a 
validation workshop on 
Gender Statistics.participated in validation 
of  Gender Statistics in 
the economic survey from 
8th -12th March, 2021at 
Machakos
Public procurement 
Regulatory Board 
Communication and 
Strategy Committee Training on the Public 
Procurement and Asset 
Disposal LawPPRA officers facilitated 
training on public 
procurement and asset 
disposal procedures in the 
Act and Regulations, 2020 
for the Communication 
and Strategy Committee 
from 17th -19th March, 
2021at Nairobi
British Chamber of 
Commerce Facilitation of a session 
during a forum on Public-
Private Dialogue on 
Business Integrity.Participated in the 
Public-Private Dialogue 
on Business Integrity 
and facilitated a session 
updates on the Public 
Procurement and Asset 
Disposal System In Kenya: 
Status of the Act and 
Updates on 23rd  March, 
2021 Nairobi82
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Source of Request Nature of Request Nature of Support/Status
Kenya Medical 
Supplies AuthorityBoard induction on Public 
Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015 and 
the Regulations, 2020Training conducted on 
18th May, 2021
County Government 
of LaikipiaTraining of staff on the 
Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Act, 2015 
and the Regulations, 
2020The training was not 
offered due to constraints 
with manpower.  
Communication 
Authority of KenyaTraining of staff on the 
new standard bid/ tender 
documentsTraining to be  conducted 
between 12th   and 16th 
July 2021 
Energy & Petroleum 
Regulatory 
AuthoritySensitization workshop 
on access to government 
procurement 
opportunities (AGPO)The training was not 
conducted due to short 
of staff capacity in the 
Authority 
Kenya Electricity 
Generating 
Company PLCIn-house training Public 
Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015 and 
the Regulations, 2020Training conducted 
virtually on 4th May 2021
Agriculture and 
Food Authority Request for a resource 
person for training on 
annual procurement 
planning and budgeting 
in line with public 
procurement and asset 
disposal Regulations 
2020 Training conducted on 
24th June 2021
National Hospital 
Insurance FundInduction of the new 
chairperson on Public 
Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015 and 
the Regulations, 2020The request was not 
actioned as it was received 
late. 
2.7  Strategic Objective 6: To Leverage and Enhance Partnerships 
and Collaborations with Stakeholders
(a) Sensitization of Procuring Entities on the Code of Ethics for Persons 
Participating in Public Procurement and Asset Disposal System
The Authority developed and issued a Code of Ethics (the Code) for persons 
participating in public procurement and asset disposal proceedings in May, 
2019, pursuant to Section 181 of the Act. During the quarter under review, 
the Authority in collaboration with the Competition Authority of Kenya (CAK) 83
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 convened sensitization sessions on competition law and Code of Ethics in 
six counties of Lamu, Marsabit, Mandera, Wajir, Busia and Elgeyo Marakwet, 
in February and March 2021. The engagement targeted County Executive 
Committee Members, Chief Officers, directors and deputy directors as well 
as the county staff involved in the public procurement and asset disposal 
processes.
(b) Sensitization of Counties on the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal 
Regulations, 2020
During the year, the National Treasury with the support of the World Bank 
convened sessions for training of County Governments on the Act and 
Regulations, 2020. The Authority being a key institution in public procurement 
and asset disposal system, participated in the sessions. The training sessions 
covered 12 counties in the first phase, between March and April, 2021 targeting 
all persons involved in public procurement and asset disposal processes. 
The second phase of training of County Governments on the Act and Regulations, 
2020 was conducted between May and June, 2021 covering 30 counties. The 
training sessions targeted all persons involved in public procurement and asset 
disposal processes, where approximately 2,400 participants were trained.
2.8 Public Procurement Administrative Review Mechanism
The Act has provided for a mechanism through which bidders who are not 
satisfied with the decisions made by procuring entities on subject procurements 
may lodge an appeal or a request for review of such processes. The Procurement 
Administrative Review Board (Review Board) is established under Section 27 of 
the Act, to review, hear and determine tendering and asset disposal appeals/
disputes. The Authority is mandated to provided secretariat and administrative 
services to the Review Board.
The Review Board is established to promote and uphold fairness, equitability, 
transparency, competitiveness and cost-effectiveness in the public procurement 
and asset disposal system through judicious, expeditious and impartial 
adjudication of matters arising from disputed procurement and asset disposal 
proceedings in order to increase accountability and public confidence.  
The Review Board’s objective is to determine tendering and asset disposal 
disputes arising from candidates and/or tenderers who claim to have suffered 
or risk suffering, loss or damage due to the breach of a duty imposed on a 
procuring entity by the Public Procurement Legal and Regulatory framework. 
2.8.1 Requests for Review Lodged 
During the year, the Review Board presided over 166 appeals/cases, where 
most of the cases were lodged in the fourth quarter. Of the 166 cases, 106 
(64%) were successful (determined in favour of the applicant), and 15 (9%) of 
the cases were withdrawn, as presented in the table below.  84
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table 21: Status of Cases Lodged within the Year by Quarter
Quarter Request for 
Reviews 
LodgedNo. of Suc -
cessful CasesNo. of 
Unsuccessful 
CasesNo. of Cases 
Withdrawn
Q1 39 19 13 7
Q2 31 23 6 2
Q3 42 30 10 2
Q4 54 34 16 4
Total 166 106 45 15
Percent 100% 64% 27% 9%
The Review Board delivered all the decisions within the prescribed period of 21 
days. In addition, the decisions rendered were signed, shared with the parties, 
and uploaded on the Authority’s website: www.ppra.go.ke for reference by 
stakeholders.
2.8.2 Decisions Referred for Judicial Review 
The parties to the review process have a right to challenge the decisions of the 
Review Board at the High Court. During the year, 21 decisions of the Review 
Board were referred for judicial review at the High Court.
The Review Board ensured that for all cases that were referred for Judicial 
Review at the High Court, necessary documents and the draft affidavits were 
submitted to the State Law Office; including instructions to the Attorney-General 
to represent the Board in Court.
2.8.3 Embedded Legal Researchers at the ARB
The ARB benefitted from the sponsorship by the International Development 
Law Organisation (IDLO) of two (2) embedded Legal Researchers who assisted 
the Review Board in undertaking Legal Research on decisions rendered, and 
also in drafting Replying Affidavits on Judicial Review cases affecting the Review 
Board. The contracts of the two personnel lapsed at the end of the period in 
review, after serving for two and a half (30 months) years.
2.8.4 Development of electronic Administrative Review   
 Management System
The development of an electronic Administrative Review management system 
was progressed in the course of the year. The identified consultant (provider) 
held several demonstrations of the dummy system to the Secretariat staff. 
The system began to be utilised by mostly the Secretariat by having the cases 
handled by the Board input into the online system.85
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
86
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 3.1 Corporate Services and Legal
(a) Publicity and Awareness Creation
During the year, the Authority run a supplementary feature in the Daily Nation 
dated 23rd December 2020 with a view to highlight its mandate, collaborations 
and other key aspects in its delivery of services. The article gave more emphasis 
on how the Authority has continued to deliver its mandate amid the covid-19 
pandemic. The major tenets of the Regulations, 2020 were highlighted in the 
question-and-answer section of the article. Also, the code of ethics for persons 
participating in public procurement and asset disposal activities in Kenya was 
published. 
The Authority also partnered with Nation Media Group during the SME 
conference and expo that took place on 18th to 20th March 2021 at KICC. 
The theme of this event was SME resilience, recovery and sustainability. This 
partnership opportunity enabled the Authority to benefit on the following: -
•	 Opportunity	 to	take	part	in	the	first	panel	discussion	 in	which	the	Acting	
Director General presented on the topic “Mechanisms in place in National 
and County Governments inclusion of private sector in doing business - 
SMEs doing business with Government”. This discussion was Aired Live on 
Nation TV. 
•	 Placement	 of	two	(2)	half	page	adverts	that	appeared	 in	the	SMEs	pull-out	 in	
Daily Nation and Business daily dated 18th and 19th March 2021 respectively. 
Through the adverts, the Authority publicised the mandatory requirements 
by public entities in line with the PPADA, 2015 and attendant regulations, 
2020.
•	 The	Authority	 participated	 in	the	three-day	 exhibition	 and	showcased	 its	
services to the members of public. The Public Procurement Information 
Portal (PPIP) and launch documentary were also run at the stand.
•	 Placement	 of	the	Authorities	 logo	across	all	media	promos	 and	pull-out	
which included TV adverts and Nation Media’s website.
In addition, the Authority also run two adverts on issuance of standard tender 
documents and roll-out of the upgraded Public Procurement Information Portal, 
with an aim of promoting its mandate and update its stakeholders on new 
developments.
(b) Corporate Communications
The website continued to be a major hub of information to the public. The 
following table below indicates the most visited pages and most downloaded 
documents during the year.87
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Table 22: Most Visited Menus in the Authority’s Website
Menu Pageviews Unique 
Pageviews
Homepage - http://ppra.go.ke/ 77,981 57,859
PPADA Act - http://ppra.go.ke /ppda/ 60,821 51,476
Standard tender documents - http://ppra.go.ke 
/standard-tender-documents/25,329 20,287
AGPO - http://ppra.go.ke /agpo/ 20,491 12,830
Regulations 2020 downloads - http://ppra.go.ke 
/download/the-public-procurement-and-asset-
disposal-regulations-2020/19,356 16,833
Tenders - http://ppra.go.ke /category/tenders/ 12,880 9,419
Market price Index - http://ppra.go.ke /market-
price-index/12,658 9,997
Regulations - http://ppra.go.ke /regulations/ 11,572 9,918
About us - http://ppra.go.ke /about-us/ 9,939 7,751
Circulars - http://ppra.go.ke /circulars/ 9,108 7,121
TOTAL 351,486 277,927
Table 23: Most Downloaded Documents
Document Downloads
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act 2015 92,515
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act Revised Edition 
201670,321
The Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Regulations, 2020 28,628
AGPO List as at 17th September 2019 15,724
Finance Act No. 15 of 2017 11,537
AGPO List as at 10th November 2017 8,536
Market Price Index – September 2019 6,278
MPI March 2020 5,667
Market Price Index March 2020 4,849
Market Price Index March 2019 4,758
(c) Customer service
During the year, the Authority continued to sensitize staff on service delivery 
charter, which was cascaded to all staff with the commitments grouped 
according to the departments responsible for providing the specific service(s). 
Members of staff were reminded of the specific service requirements to 
customers in their day-to-day delivery of service. The Authority also sensitised 88
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 the Access to Government Procurement Opportunities (AGPO) suppliers on its 
citizens’ delivery charter through a virtual sensitisation workshop that was held 
on 25th March, 2021. The Authority did not undertake a customer satisfaction 
survey during the financial year due to financial constraints. 
(d) Corporate Social Responsibility
In line with the Presidential directive on “inclusion of tree planting in Corporate 
Social Responsibilities activities”, the Authority partnered with Kenya Forest 
Service and adopted one (1) hectare of degraded forest area in Kimondi 
Forest, Nandi County. The partnership involves establishment, protection 
and maintenance of the adopted forest for three years. During the year, the 
Authority participated by engaging in a tree planting activity that took place on 
29th June, 2021.
(e) Legal affairs
During the year, the Authority handled 14 court case matters. Eight of them 
were filed in the Judicial Review Court, four in the Constitutional Petition Court, 
one in the Civil Division Court and one being a mediation matter. One judgment 
has been issued in favour of the Authority, while two judgments were awaiting 
delivery, and all other cases were ongoing matters. 
(f) Complaints against the Authority and Access to Information 
The Authority continued to positively address customers’ feedback and 
requests to access information. During the year, seven complaints against the 
Authority were received and resolved. The most recurring complaint was on the 
standard tender documents that had been posted on the Authority’s website 
whereby customers complained that they were poorly formatted. The error 
in the documents has since been corrected and the revisions shared with the 
stakeholders.
During the year, the Authority received 47 requests for information were received 
and provided as necessary. The requests for information were mainly derived 
on Administrative Review Board cases and advisory services. Subsequently, 
the reports on complaints and access to information were submitted to the 
Commission on Administrative Justice (CAJ), whereby the Authority attained a 
composite score of 98%.
3.2  Internal Controls and Risk Management   
The Internal Audit function exists to provide reasonable assurance and 
consultancy services in order to add value as well as improve the Authority’s 89
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 operations and internal control systems.  The department assists the Authority 
to accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach 
to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and 
governance processes. 
To ensure the independence and objectivity of the Internal Audit function, 
the department reports functionally to the Public Procurement Regulatory 
Board’s Audit Committee (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Audit Committee’) and 
administratively to the Director General.  
(a) Quality Assurance
During the year, the Internal Audit function undertook and completed a number 
of reviews on various systems within the Authority. Reports were shared with 
management with recommendations for implementation. Unresolved issues 
were escalated to the Audit Committee for consideration and eventually to the 
Full Board in which resolutions were made. 
(b) Audit, Risk and Governance Committee of the Board
The Audit Committee forms a key element in the governance process by 
providing oversight of financial reporting, governance, internal controls and risk 
management.  The Audit Committee assists the Board in fulfilling its statutory 
and fiduciary oversight responsibilities relating to governance, accountability, 
risk management and transparency to the Authority and its stakeholders. During 
the year, the Audit Committee held a number of activities as indicated below; 
(i) Ordinary Committee Meetings: the Audit Committee held three 
ordinary committee meetings on the following dates; 23rd September, 2020; 
11th January, 2021; and 7th April, 2021. Some of the issues deliberated on by 
the Audit Committee during the meetings included; 
•	 Review	 of	the	Audit	Committee’s	 Work	plan	and	Budget	for	the	2020/2021	
Financial Year;
•	 Review	 of	the	Internal	 Audit	Work	plan,	budget	and	training	 needs	for	the	
2020/2021 Financial Year;
•	 Review	 of	the	internal	audit	report(s)	 on	the	Authority’s	 financial	 transactions;
•	 Status	of 	implementation	of 	the	outstanding	audit	issues;
•	 Consideration	 of	the	appeals	 made	by	management	 on	the	committee’s	
report on outstanding audit issues;
•	 The	status	of	absorption	 of	the	PPRA’s	budget	for	the	2020/2021	 Financial	
Year;90
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 •	 Reports	of 	the	trainings	attended	by	the	 Audit	Committee;	
•	 Review	of 	the	continuous	payroll	audit	report;	and	
•	 Periodic	review	of 	the	internal	audit	function’s	activities	during	the	year. 	
(ii) Audit Committee Training
For the Audit Committee to effectively discharge its mandate there’s need for 
the committee members to continuously upgrade their knowledge and skills. 
During the year, the Audit Committee undertook two trainings as follows;
•	 Joint	 training	 of	the	Audit,	Risk	&	Governance	 Committee	 and	the	
Finance and Administration Committee of the Board 
 The Audit, Risk and Governance Committee and the Finance and 
Administration (F&AC) Committee of the Board held a joint virtual training 
between Wednesday, 27th to Friday, 29th January, 2021. The training was 
motivated by the fact that there was need for the various parties (that is 
management, Internal audit, Audit Committee and F&AC) to understand 
their various roles in the preparation and presentation of the financial 
statements as well as appreciate issues relating to risk management and 
business continuity. The training was conducted by the Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants of Kenya (ICPAK). A total of seventeen (17) participants 
took part in the training.
•		Effective	Board	 Audit	Committee	Oversight	 Training	 
 Joint training for the full Board and Management held virtually on 3rd – 4th 
June, 2021. The training was facilitated by the Institute of Internal Auditors, 
Kenya. A total of 24 participants drawn from the Board and management 
took part in the training. The training introduced the participants to a 
wide range of issues that are critical in understanding the oversight role 
of the audit committee, the functioning of the internal audit function, 
business continuity and the management of risks in the changing business 
environment.  
•	 Conducting	 a	Fraud	Corruption	 Prevention	 Health	Check-up	 Workshop	
 This workshop was held virtually on 24th – 25th June, 2021. The workshop 
was facilitated by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, Kenya 
Chapter. The main objective of the workshop was to equip management 
and the board members with knowledge and skills to help them identify the 
fraud/corruption prevention and detection gaps in the Authority and enable 
to seal the loopholes and avoid huge losses due to fraud/corruption.   
 This was a practical course that enabled participants conduct a self-
assessment of the Authority and made recommendations on how to fix 
the fraud/corruption prevention exposure gaps identified during the fraud 
health check-up.91
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021  (c) Risk Management
Risk management is an integral part of the Authority’s strategic management. 
Risk is the potentiality that expected and unexpected events may have 
an adverse impact on the achievement of the Authority’s objectives. Risk 
management aims at identifying, measuring and mitigating various risks that 
are intrinsic as well as extrinsic. The Regulatory Board and management realized 
the centrality of risk management in the Authority and have continuously 
advocated for an overarching risk management culture in strategy formulation 
and implementation.
The Authority has identified a number of key risks that are likely to impede the 
implementation of its objectives. Strategies to mitigate the identified risks have 
been mapped out and an implementation action plan developed. The key risks 
facing the Authority and the mitigation measures being implemented include:-
(i) Inadequate office space at the Head Office 
The leased office space at the National Bank building, Nairobi that houses 
PPRA’s headquarters is inadequate to accommodate the staff complement 
of the Authority and the operations of the Public Procurement Administrative 
Review Board. This challenge has adversely impacted on the health and safety 
of the workforce, security of records and the needs of the growing number of 
staff arising from the expanded mandate of the Authority. The Authority with 
the support of the National Treasury has made progress towards acquisition 
of adequate office space at Kenya Institute of Supplies Management (KISM) 
Towers along Ngong Road in Nairobi. 
(ii) Corona virus (COVID – 19) Pandemic
The Corona Virus (COVID-19) pandemic outbreak in Kenya in the month of 
March 2020 has had an impact on the activities of the Authority. The Authority 
has put in place measures to mitigate the effects of the virus both to its staff as 
well as the stakeholders as guided by the directives issued by the Government 
from time to time. 
(iii) Compliance Audit Risk 
This is the likelihood that the Authority will not manage to provide assurance 
on most of the procurement activities carried out in procuring entities that are 
within the purview of the Authority. The mitigation measures for compliance 
audit risk being explored by the Authority include: acquisition of supervisory 
rights to Procure to Pay (P2P) module of the IFMIS system, strengthening the 
capacity of technical functions, collaborations with other law enforcement 
agencies, benchmarking with other procurement regulators within the region 92
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 and internationally, and the development and operationalization of ICT based 
monitoring & evaluation systems. 
(iv) Inadequate Funding 
The Authority continues to face the challenge of limited funds to deliver on 
its mandate. The mitigation measures undertaken include: prudent financial 
management, collaboration with development partners, implementation of the 
internal revenue generation strategies, and lobbying for additional government 
funding. 
(v) Loss of Authority’s and clients’ records 
The mitigation measures being explored and/or implemented include: frequent 
trainings of staff on records and information management, development 
of business continuity plans, recruitment of a records management officer, 
development and implementation of a records management policy, IT 
innovations, acquisition of adequate secure and convenient storage facilities, 
and development and operationalization of the ICT Policy. 
(vi) Reputational risks
Reputation risk is the potential for negative publicity, public perception or 
occurrence of uncontrollable events that may have an adverse impact on the 
Authority’s reputation thereby impacting on the achievement of its mandate. 
The mitigation strategies being explored include; having a clear understanding 
of the Authority’s mandate amongst the internal & external stakeholders, 
review of service charter and sharing it with all the stakeholders, rebranding, 
implementation of customer feedback, signing MOUs with strategic 
stakeholders, communicating and enforcing the Authority’s Code of Conduct 
and Ethics, and development and implementation of the Anti- Corruption and 
Whistle blowing Policy. 
(vii) Litigation risks 
The mitigation strategies include: strengthening of the Authority’s legal capacity, 
acquisition of professional indemnity insurance, promotion of amicable 
settlement of matters, and having a robust Complaints Management System 
and Case Management System for the Public Procurement Administrative 
Review Board. 
(viii) Occupational Safety, Health and Environmental risks
These are risks arising from the negative exposures in relation to safety, health 
and other environmental factors at the workplace. The mitigation strategies being 
explored / implemented include: general cleaning and hygiene, fumigation, 93
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 social distancing, strengthening the Authority’s security systems, staff training 
on safety and security matters, and having in place medical insurance and other 
related covers. 
(ix) Corruption risk
The 17th Cycle Performance Contracting Guidelines has an indicator on 
corruption prevention. This performance indicator aims to combat and prevent 
corruption and unethical practices and promote standards and best practices in 
governance amongst public institutions in Kenya. As a mitigation measure, the 
Authority has developed the Corruption Prevention Plan and the Corruption 
Mitigation strategies in areas specified by the Guidelines. These areas include; 
Core Mandate of the Authority; Information Communication Technology; Payroll 
Management; and Procurement and Financial Management. The Authority 
has been making quarterly returns on the progress of implementation of the 
mitigation strategies to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission. 
3.3  ICT Support Services 
The Authority continued to embrace and enhance the innovative use of ICT 
products and services to support its core mandate as well as its administrative 
processes. During the year, the Authority increased automation of its business 
operations through enhancement of the Public Procurement Information Portal 
(PPIP) to enable procuring entities submit mandatory reports required by the 
Act and Regulations. The Authority also leveraged on emerging technologies in 
its operations to ensure business continuity during the corona virus pandemic in 
compliance with Government directives. The key projects undertaken include:
(a) Upgrade of PPRA Server infrastructure & Implementation 
of a Disaster Recovery (DR) Site
The Authority commence the process of improving the capacity, resilience 
and security of its server infrastructure by acquiring additional servers and 
server storage as well as implementing a disaster recovery site. This will reduce 
downtimes and enhance the availability of newly rolled out systems whose data 
processing, storage and security demands have continued to rise.  By the end of 
the year, procurement process for supply of new servers had been concluded, 
awaiting contract signing. The system will be implemented in the first quarter of 
the next financial year. 
(b) Upgrade of the Public Procurement Information Portal 
(PPIP) – http://tenders.go.ke  
The Executive Order No. 2 of 2018 (EO) requires all Public Procuring Entities 
to maintain and continuously update and publicize details of procurement 94
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 information and contracts awards. The Public Procurement Information Portal 
(PPIP) was developed to enable public procuring entities comply with the 
Executive Order through publication of the required information on public 
procurement. 
During the year, the Authority upgraded and successfully rolled out the 
upgraded portal. All PEs were migrated to the new portal with enhanced features 
and functionalities.  The Authority had also planned for capacity building and 
training to all PEs on the new portal which was however affected by the Covid-19 
restrictions. PEs are however, continually being supported through telephone, 
email and other channels such as remote desktop connections. It is expected 
that there will be higher uptake and usage of the portal with the enhancements 
that were done.
(c) Automation of the Administrative Review Board 
Operations
The Authority has rolled out an electronic Administrative Review Case 
Management system (eARCMS). This system automates the operations on 
the Administrative Review Board, key among including Application filing, 
Receipt and Registration of Appeal, Notification of Request for Review, Case 
analysis, Review Hearing Management, Adjournment, Decision writing, and 
Communication of the Board’s Decision. This system will enable the Secretariat 
and the Board improve their operational performance.
At the end of the year, the internal pilot roll-out of the system was completed 
and all cases for the current financial year captured in the system. All incoming 
cases are currently captured and processed through the system.  The system is 
available online and is accessible through the link arcms.ppra.go.ke. The public 
launch is expected early in the next financial year.
(d) Automation of the Complaints Management 
The Authority rolled out an online Case Management System (CMS). This system 
automates the Authority’s Complaints Handling process of the Complaints and 
Investigations Department. The system allows members of the public to lodge 
their complaints against Procuring Entities through the online platform and 
be able to track the status of processing of their complaints without having to 
come to the Authority’s premises. 
As at the end of the year, the internal pilot roll-out of the system was completed 
and all incoming complaints captured and processed through the system.  The 
system was also made available online and is accessible through the link cms.
ppra.go.ke. The public launch is expected early in the next financial year.95
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 3.4  Procurement Operations  
(a) Procurement Planning
During the 2020/2021 financial year, the Authority planned to spend Kes. 
41,800,000.00 for procurement of goods, works and services. The Authority 
therefore reserved Kes. 12,540,000 of its procurement budgets for the 
disadvantaged groups (women, youth and Persons with Disabilities (PWDs)); 
representing 30% of the total planned procurement budget. Of the 30% 
reserved procurement budget, Kes. 250,800.00‬ (being 2% of this budget) was 
reserved for PWDs. 
(b) Compliance with Mandatory Reporting Requirements
During the quarter, the Authority filed mandatory reports that were due in 
the quarterly as required under the Act. The Authority did not undertake any 
procurements to facilitate advertising in the Public Procurement Information 
Portal (PPIP).
(c) Access to Government Procurement Opportunities (AGPO)  
During the year, the Authority awarded 43 contracts worth Kes. 11,057,881.84 
to the firms owned by youth, women and PWDs. This present a shortfall of Kes 
1,482,145.16 against the reserved budget of  Kes 12,540,000 to the target 
groups translating utilization level of 88.2%. The disaggregation of the number 
and value of contracts is presented in the table below. 
Table 24: Distribution of Number and Value of Contracts by Target Groups
Category  No. of Contracts Value of Contracts 
(Kes)
PWD 5 1,060,858
Women 24 8,136,290
Youth 13 1,860,733.84
Total 43 11,057,881.84
3.5  Human Resource Management and 
Administration
Human resource plays a major role in the success of the Authority given that the 
Authority is a service organization. The Authority continues to invest in employee 
related matters on areas of recruitment, training and development, employee 
compensation, welfare schemes administration, transport and security/safety 
compliance.96
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (a) Staff Establishment 
During the year, the Authority had an approved staff establishment of 115 with 
a total in-post of 71. A summary of the number of employees that were in the 
Authority and their positioning is presented in the table below.
Table 25:  Summary of Number and Positioning of Employees in the 
Authority
Position Grade No of Employee Total
Male Female
Management 1-3 9 2 11
Technical experts 4-8 32 17 49
Support Cadres 9-12 7 4 11
Total 48 23 71
The Authority maintained a fair balance with the majority of the employees 
being technical experts and a few being in management and support cadres. In 
addition, of the 71 employees, 60 are stationed at the head office, four (4) each 
at Kisumu and Mombasa regional offices and three (3) at the Eldoret regional 
office. one officer is still seconded to the National Treasury and Planning.
During the year, the Director General and the General Manager Technical 
Services exited the Authority.  The Director General exited after end of his 
contract while the General Manager Technical Services exited after attaining 
the Mandatory retirement age. The Board appointed the persons holding the 
position of Manager Compliance and Manager Administrative Review Board 
(ARB) to act in the positions of Director General and the General Manager 
Technical Services respectively; and other staff to hold acting appointments to 
positions of Manager Compliance, Manager ARB and Manager ICT. Over the 
same period, the Board started the recruitment process to fill the positions of 
Director General, General Manager-Technical Services and Manager ICT.  The 
processes had not been completed by the end of the year.
(b) Staff Development
In order to strengthen employee skills and improve individual and organizational 
performance, the Authority during the year supported staff trainings and 
participation in the following areas: 
(a) Senior Management Course 
(b) Conducting fraud/ corruption prevention health check-up workshop
(c) Compliance reviews and audits
(d) Internal audit97
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (e) ISMS awareness training
(f) ISO- QMS Lead Auditors Training
(g) Road safety Mainstreaming 
(h) Defensive and First Aid Course
(i) Gender Mainstreaming
(j) Disability Mainstreaming 
(k) Alcohol and drug abuse mainstreaming
(l) HIV & AIDs prevention
(m) Defensive driving trainings 
(n) Microsoft Navision ERP self-service training
(c) Staff Welfare 
The Authority provided support and conducive working environment and 
facilities, adequate transport management, security, medical and general 
insurances. This was aimed at enhancing employee satisfaction. The Authority 
facilitated the trustees to execute their responsibilities of managing the Public 
Procurement Oversight Authority Staff Pension Scheme (PPOASPS). 
The Authority also provided support and conducive working environment 
and facilities, adequate transport management, security, medical and general 
insurances. This was aimed at enhancing employee satisfaction. Through a 
procurement process, the Authority entered into a new contract for provision 
of medical cover to Board members and staff with Jubilee Health Insurance 
Limited. The contract is for two years effective 19th January 2021. The new 
scheme has improved benefits with improvements on the overall limits on out-
patients and enhancement of the sublimit in the in-patient cover. The cover also 
caters for COVID-19 and related complications.
(d) Public Service Internship Programme (PSIP)
During the year, the Authority received nine interns from the Public Service 
Commission under the PSIP programme cohort 3. The interns were deployed 
to various departments. The 12 interns who had been deployed to the Authority 
under PSIP cohort 2 successfully completed their contract term. 
(e) Performance Contracting and Evaluation
The Authority implemented a results-based performance management system 
and implemented the annual performance contract for 2020-2021.98
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (f) COVID-19 Pandemic
The Authority continued to put measures to facilitate staff and customers are 
protected from COVID -19. This in with the work place guidelines on Covid-19 
as stipulated in circular from the executive office of the president Head of the 
Public Service. Ref OP/CAB.26/1/3A dated 20th July, 2020. In March 2021 some 
cases on Covid-19 were detected in the Authority and arising from this KEMRI 
was invited to conduct COVID-19 tests to the Head office staff, interns and staff 
of service providers. The head office was also closed for two weeks effective 
29th March 202. The staff who had tested positive proceeded on self-isolation 
and they resumed duty once they tested negative.
(g) Review and development of Human Resource Instruments
The Authority carried out a development and review of the existing Human 
Resource instruments in quarter two. The instruments were the Organization 
structure, Career progression guidelines and Human resource Policy and 
Procedures manual. The documents were submitted for approval to the National 
Treasury. In the fourth quarter the National Treasury returned the documents to 
the Authority with recommendations to make some amendments. The proposals 
from the National Treasury were taken on board and the document resubmitted 
to the National Treasury to review and forward to the State Corporations 
Advisory Committee (SCAC). 
(h) Operationalisation of Nakuru Regional office
During the year, the Authority operationalised the Nakuru regional office by 
posting staff. The office is now fully operational to serve stakeholders within the 
central rift valley region. 
(i) Acquisition of office space for the Head office
During the year the National Treasury facilitated allocation of office space to the 
Authority at KISM Towers, along Ngong Road. This will host the Authority’s head 
office. The Authority is seeking additional funding to undertake partitioning 
works to allow occupation.99
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
100
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 4.1 Conclusion
During the period under review the Authority continued to strengthen 
systems and processes aimed at realization of an effective and efficient public 
procurement system. The major activities of the year included compliance 
monitoring in terms of review of mandatory reports submitted by procuring 
entities, procurement reviews, assessments, follow ups and contract audits. 
The others include complaints management, investigations, research and 
information management and strengthening of internal organization capacity 
to undertake the regulatory functions.
On compliance monitoring activities, the average compliance level was 55.4% 
which indicates average compliance with the Legal and Regulatory Framework. 
This presents an improvement of 25% down from 44.32% registered during the 
previous 2019/2020 financial year. Some of the weaknesses identified included; 
most of the PEs not having internal procurement and asset disposal manuals; 
failed to maintain complete procurement and contract files as envisaged by 
Regulation 34(2) of the Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations, 2006  
and the Public Procurement Records Management Procedures Manual (2010); 
failure by Accounting Officers to appoint Disposal Committees as envisaged 
by Section 163 of the Act and Regulation 177 despite having asset that 
were not being used/obsolete asset /inactive Disposal Committees leading 
to accumulation of obsolete/unserviceable assets; heads of procurement 
functions failed to prepare monthly progress reports on all contracts to update 
the Accounting Officers on the implementation of contracts; and most of the 
PEs failed to publicize contract awards and submit the same to the Authority as 
prescribed.
On complaints management, most of the complaints received by the Authority 
were on flaws in tender evaluation and specifications developed; delayed 
payments; allegations of corruption during procurement proceedings, and 
request for a review of procurement processes. On the other hand, the major 
areas of request for clarifications on the Act were on contract variations and 
amendments where entities sought to extend contracts owing to delays 
in finalizing fresh procurement proceedings; clarifications on choice of 
procurement methods including seeking of the Authority’s concurrence on the 
entities’ preferred method especially use of direct procurement method and 
seeking of guidance on termination of procurement proceedings after issuance 
of letters of notification of award.
The Authority issued the entities with advice on corrective measures to be 
implemented in order to mitigate the risks associated with the identified 
challenges. In addition, the Authority continued to offer technical support to 101
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 the procuring entities to ensure that they complied with the law and directives. 
The actions of the Authority during the year were limited by the challenges, 
including inadequate budgetary provision. The Authority looks forward to 
cooperation and support from the stakeholders to facilitate realization of the 
mandate and aspirations detailed in the Strategic Plan in the coming financial 
year.
4.2  Challenges Faced by the Authority
During the year under review, the authority faced a number of challenges that 
constrained realization of the planned activities for the year and as detailed in 
the strategic plan (2018/2019 – 2022/2023). These include:
(a) Financial constraints that saw most of the planned activities such as 
sensitization of users on the new standard tender documents and formats 
not being implemented as planned. This has major implications as the 
Authority was not able to meet its regulatory, statutory obligations and 
stakeholder expectations.
(b) Inadequate institutional capacity in terms of human resource numbers 
and multidisciplinary competencies required to effectively implement the 
expanded mandate of the Authority.
(c) The COVID-19 pandemic, which affected implementation of the activities 
planned for the last two quarters of the financial year in compliance with 
the Government directives. The Authority requires additional funding for 
recruitment of personnel to the approved establishment.
(d) Some procuring entities have continued to fail to submit mandatory reports 
as prescribed. This has denied the Government and stakeholders’ valuable 
data for informed decision making on public procurement. This includes 
ignoring the Presidential Executive Order No. 2 of 2018.
(e) Delayed Operationalization of the Capacity building levy: The Authority 
has not been able to meet the stakeholder needs for capacity development 
due to constraints in funding which had been targeted once the levy was 
operationalized.
4.3 Recommendations to Stakeholders
Based on the findings and experience from the regulatory activities implemented, 
the Authority recommends that: 
1. The National Treasury should allocate adequate resources to the Authority 
to strengthen delivery of its mandate owing to the importance of ensuring 102
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 efficiency and effectiveness in the public procurement and asset disposal 
system. A well-funded regulator has the capacity of minimizing malpractices 
currently experienced in the public procurement system and immensely 
contributing to the fight against corruption. 
2. The Accounting Officers should uphold compliance with the provisions of 
the Act while undertaking procurement and asset disposal proceedings.
3. The Accounting Officers should submit mandatory reports to the Authority 
as prescribed as well as publish in the Public Procurement Information 
Portal (PPIP) in accordance with the provisions of the Executive Order No. 2 
of 2018; 
4. The Accounting Officers should strengthen records and inventory 
management systems within their entities, to ensure continuity in 
procurement and contract records management.
5. The Accounting Officers should continuously professionalize and build 
capacity of their staff on the Public Procurement Law and other relevant 
requirements, and 
6. The Accounting Officers should promptly pay suppliers and contractors 
within the stipulated contractual requirements.103
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
104
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS
The Directors submit their report together with the audited financial 
statements for the year ended June 30, 2021 which show the state of 
the Authority’s affairs.
Principal activities
The principal activities of the Authority are outlined on page 3 of this 
report.
Results
The results of the Authority for the year ended June 30, 2021 and 
accompanying notes are set out on pages 55 to 85.
Directors
The members of the Public Procurement Regulatory Board who served 
during the year are shown on pages 8 to 12 while members of the Public 
Procurement Administrative Review Board who served during the year 
are shown on pages 13 to 19.
Dividends/Surplus remission
In accordance with Section 219 (2) of the Public Financial Management 
Act regulations, regulatory entities shall remit into Consolidated Fund, 
ninety per centum of its surplus funds reported in the audited financial 
statements after the end of each financial year.  The Authority did not 
make any surplus during the year under review and hence no remittance 
to the Consolidated Fund. 
Auditors
The Auditor General is responsible for the statutory audit of the Authority 
in accordance with Article 229 of the Constitution of Kenya and the 
Public Audit Act 2015.
By Order of the Board
Corporation Secretary
Nairobi
Date:30/5/2022
105
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS’ 
RESPONSIBILITY
Section 81 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 and Section 25 of 
the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 require the Directors to 
prepare financial statements in respect of PPRA, which give a true and fair view 
of the state of affairs of the Authority at the end of the financial year/period 
and the operating results for that year/period. The Directors are also required 
to ensure that PPRA keeps proper accounting records which disclose with 
reasonable accuracy the financial position of the Authority. The Directors are 
also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Authority.
The Directors are responsible for the preparation and presentation of the 
Authority’s financial statements, which give a true and fair view of its state of 
affairs for and as at the end of the financial year (period) ended on June 30, 2020. 
This responsibility includes: (i) maintaining adequate financial management 
arrangements and ensuring that these continue to be effective throughout the 
reporting period; (ii) maintaining proper accounting records, which disclose 
with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Authority; 
(iii) designing, implementing and maintaining internal controls relevant to the 
preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements, and ensuring that 
they are free from material misstatements, whether due to error or fraud; (iv) 
safeguarding the assets of the Authority; (v) selecting and applying appropriate 
accounting policies; and (vi) making accounting estimates that are reasonable 
in the circumstances.
The Directors accept responsibility for the Authority’s financial statements, 
which have been prepared using appropriate accounting policies supported 
by reasonable and prudent judgements and estimates, in conformity with 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), and in the manner 
required by the PFM Act, 2012 and Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act 
2015. The Directors are of the opinion that the Authority’s financial statements 
give a true and fair view of the state of its transactions during the financial year 
ended June 30, 2021, and of the financial position as at that date. The Directors 
further confirm the completeness of the accounting records maintained for 
the Authority, which have been relied upon in the preparation of the financial 
statements as well as the adequacy of the systems of internal financial control.106
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Nothing has come to the attention of the Directors to indicate that the Authority 
will not remain a going concern for at least the next twelve months from the 
date of this statement.
Approval of the financial statements
The Authority’s financial statements were approved by the Board on 15th 
September 2021 and signed on its behalf by:
______________________        ______________________  
Director             Director
107
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
115 to 142108
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
109
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
110
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
111
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
112
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
113
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
114
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 
115
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021
Note 2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Revenue from non-exchange 
transactions   
Unconditional Government Grants 6 306,987,152   340,000,000 
Revenue from exchange transactions
Rendering of services 7 23,979,983     22,125,022 
Finance Income 8           19,175       8,200,800 
Other Income 9      4,689,025 0
Total Revenue from exchange 
transactions      28,688,183    30,325,822 
Total Revenue  335,675,335  370,325,822 
    
EXPENSES    
Employee Costs 10  199,468,837   202,592,133 
Board Expenses 11    46,218,233     45,157,774 
General Expenses 12    88,858,430   105,332,131 
Repairs and Maintenance 13    2,970,885       3,126,404 
Contracted Services 14   14,325,216     32,932,314 
Finance Costs 15         0          0 
Depreciation and Amortization 16   12,180,468     10,013,857 
Total Expenses  364,022,069  399,154,613 
Surplus / (Deficit) for the year before 
extra ordinary item   (28,346,734)   (28,828,791)
Extraordinary item 27       (654,273) 0
Surplus / (Deficit) for the year after 
ex-traordinary item (29,001,007)   (28,828,791)
The notes set out on pages 62 to 85 form an integral part of the financial statements.116
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
AS AT 30TH JUNE 2021
Note 2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
ASSETS    
Current Assets   
Cash and cash equivalents 17       154,683,728 193,192,905
Receivables from exchange transac-tions 18         24,278,860 11,486,290
Receivables from non-exchange 
trans-actions19         61,962,181 7,572,159
Total Current Assets      240,924,769 212,251,354
  
Non- current Assets    
Property, Plant and Equipment 20           7,856,737 9,644,819
Intangible Assets 21           8,136,676 15,526,685
Work In Progress 22 0   945,000
Total Non-Current Assets        15,993,413 26,116,504
Total Assets      256,918,182 238,367,858
    
LIABILITIES    
Current Liabilities    
Trade & Other Payables from exchange 
transactions23         18,571,530 21,020,199
Provisions 24         20,676,200     20,676,200 
Deferred income 25         50,000,000 0
Total current liabilities        89,247,730 41,696,399
Net Assets    
Accumulated Fund 26        
167,670,452 196,671,459
Total Net Assets and Liabilities      256,918,182 238,367,858
The financial statements and accompanying notes on page 55 to 85 were 
signed on behalf of the Authority by:
Mr Andrew M. Musangi  Ms Pauline O. Obonyo
Chairman, PPRB   Ag. Director General  
117
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN NET ASSETS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021
Notes Accumulated 
FundRevalua -
tion 
Reserve Retained 
Earnings Capital/
Devel -
opment 
Grants/Fund Total
Ksh Ksh Ksh Ksh Ksh
Balance at  
01.07.2019439,602,015 0 0 0 439,602,015
Transfers to 
Other Govt 
Institutions(214,080,700) 0 0 0 (214,080,700)
Capital/De -
velopment 
Grants/Fund 
received dur -
ing the year0 0 0 0
Adjustment 
for leave 
provision(21,065) 0 0 0 (21,065)
Surplus  for 
the year(28,828,791) 0 0 0 (28,828,791)
Balance at  
30.06.2020196,671,459 196,671,459
Transfers to 
Other Govt 
Institutions0 0 0 0 0
Capital/De -
velopment 
Grants/Fund 
received dur -
ing the year25 0 0 0 50,000,000 50,000,000
Surplus  for 
the year(29,001,007) 0 0 0 (29,001,007)
Balance at  
30.06.2021167,670,452 0 0 50,000,000 217,607,452
Note: 
•	 PPRA 	Net	Assets	of 	Ksh	75,811,796	includes	a	development	grant	of 	Ksh	50	million	
for partition of office space at KISM Towers.
•	 PPRA 	Staff	loans	scheme	net	assets	are	Ksh	99,978,270118
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021
Note 2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Unconditional Government Grants 6       306,987,152    340,000,000 
    
Rendering of services 7  23,979,983      22,125,022 
Finance Income 8       19,175        8,200,800 
Other Income 9     4,689,025 0
Total Revenue from exchange 
transactions        
28,688,183     30,325,822 
Total Revenue  335,675,335  370,325,822 
    
EXPENSES    
Employee Costs 10  199,468,837    202,592,133 
Board Expenses 11   46,218,233      45,157,774 
General Expenses 12    88,858,430    105,332,131 
Repairs and Maintenance 13      2,970,885        3,126,404 
Contracted Services 14    14,325,216      32,932,314 
Finance Costs 15       0           0 
Depreciation and Amortization 16    12,180,468      10,013,857 
Total Expenses  364,22,069 399,154,613 
Surplus / (Deficit)  (28,346,734)  (28,828,791)
Extra-ordinary item 27 (654,273) 0
(29,001,007)  (28,828,791)
Adjusted for:    
Depreciation and Amortization  16    12,180,468      10,013,857 
Extra-ordinary item 27 654,273 0
Cash flows from operating activities 
before work-ing capital changes       
(16,166,266)   (18,814,934)
Increase/(Decrease) in trade & other 
payables   (2,448,669)    (10,258,286)
Increase/(Decrease) in deffered income   50,000,000 0
Increase/(Decrease) in Provisions  0           106,833 
Decrease/(Increase) in receivables from 
exchange transactions        
(12,792,570)     10,783,879 
Decrease/(Increase) in receivables from 
non-exchange transactions(54,390,022) (685,254)119
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Note 2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Decrease/(Increase) in work-in-progress  945,000 0         
Net Cash flows from Operating 
Activities (34,852,527)  (18,867,762)
    
Other Cash flows    
Tranfers from other Government 
Institutions 0    160,600,000 
Insurance refund/compensation           0             85,767 
GPA funds received          616,026        4,060,000 
GPA funds paid out        (616,026)    (4,160,000)
Transfers to other Government 
Institutions 0  (600,00,000)
Net other cash flows     0 (439,414,233)
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING 
ACTIVITES   
Acquisition of tangible assets    (3,656,650)    (1,038,495)
Acquisition of intangible assets  0      (8,793,883)
Net cash flow from Investing 
Activities   (3,656,650)  (9,832,378)
Net changes in Cash and Cash 
Equivalents (38,509,177) (468,114,373)
Cash & Cash Equivalents opening 
balance 193,192,905    661,307,278 
Cash & Cash Equivalents closing 
balance 154,683,728  193,192,905 120
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021
Revenue Note Original 
BudgetAdjust-
mentsFinal 
BudgetActual on 
comparable 
basisVariance Utiliz-
ationFoot  
note
Ksh Ksh Ksh Ksh
Recurrent Gov-ernment 
Grants 6 349,487,151 0 349,487,151 306,987,152 (42,499,999) 88% a
Development Government 
Grants25 50,000,000 0 50,000,000 50,000,000 0 100%
Rendering of ser-vices 7 14,900,000 5,100,000 20,000,000 23,979,983 3,979,983 120% b
Finance Income 8 0 4,400,000 4,400,000 19,175 (4,380,825) 0%
Other income 9 0 0 0 4,689,025 4,689,025  
Revenue Reserve  0 19,382,800 19,382,800 0 (19,382,800) 0%  
 Total Revenue  364,387,151 28,882,800 443,269,951 385,675,335 (57,594,616) 96%  
Expenses         
Employee Costs 10 207,300,000 0 207,300,000 199,468,837 7,831,163 96%
Board Expenses 11 26,122,000 10,782,800 36,904,800 46,218,233 (9,313,433) 125% c
General  Expens-es 12 104,550,000 0 104,550,000 88,858,430 15,691,570 85% d
Repairs and Maintenance 13 5,015,000 0 5,015,000 2,970,885 2,044,115 59% e
Contracted Ser-vices 14 9,100,000 5,100,000 14,200,000 14,325,216 (125,216) 101%
Finance Costs 15 300,151 0 300,151 0 300,151 0%
Depreciation and 
Amortization16 0 0 0 12,180,468 (12,180,468)  
Purchase of Tan-gible Assets 20 10,000,000 13,000,000 23,000,000 3,656,650 19,343,350 16% f
Purchase of In-tangible 
Assets21 2,000,000 0 2,000,000 0 2,000,000 0% g
Partitioning of Office 
Space – KISM Towers25 50,000,000 0 50,000,000 0 50,000,000 0% h
 Total Expenses  364,387,151 28,882,800 443,269,951 367,678,719 25,591,232 101%121
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (a) Recurrent Government grants:  The Authority did not receive the full 
exchequer for Q4 of FY 2020/2021. During Q4, PPRA received exchequer 
grant of Ksh 44,871,788.15 against expectation of Ksh 87,371,787.90.
(b) Rendering of services:  The value of cases filed for review at the Review 
Board was higher than had been projected resulting in higher than 
projected filing fee.
(c) Board expenses:  The expenses for the Review Board which is a tribunal 
were higher than anticipated. 
(d) General expenses:  There was less spending than the budget on a few of 
the budget lines.
(e) Repairs & maintenance:  The variance is due to less than anticipated repair 
works during the year under review.
(f) Tangible assets:  The Authority had committed funds for purchase of a 
server and also paid for delivery of a vehicle. Both assets had not been 
delivered as at 30th June 2021 thus the funds had not been expensed. 
(g) Purchase of Intangible assets:  The funds were for purchase of software 
for the server that was being procured but the procurement process had 
not been concluded by 30th June 2021.
(h)  Partitioning of office space at KISM Towers:  The architectural designs 
for the building were being done by State Department for Public Works 
and had not finished by 30th June 2021. The funds were committed and 
paid in FY 2021/2022 when the work was done.
Reconciliation of Expenses as per Statement of Financial Performance and 
Statement of Comparison of Budget Vs Actual.
Details Ksh
Total expenses as per statement of Comparison of 
budget vs actual367,678,719
Less: Purchase of assets 3,656,650
Total expenses as per statement of financial perfor-mance 364,022,069122
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1. GENERAL INFORMATION
The Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (the Authority) is established 
under Section 8 (1) of the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2015. PPRA is 
domiciled in Kenya and has regional offices in Mombasa, Kisumu and Eldoret. 
The Authority is mandated with monitoring, assessing and reviewing the public 
procurement and asset disposal system to ensure that they respect the national 
values and other provisions of the constitution.
2. STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE AND BASIS OF 
PREPARATION
The Authority’s financial statements have been prepared in accordance with 
and comply with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS). The 
financial statements are presented in Kenya shillings, which is the functional 
and reporting currency of the Authority. The accounting policies have been 
consistently applied to all the years presented.
The financial statements have been prepared on the basis of historical cost, 
unless stated otherwise. The cash flow statement is prepared using the indirect 
method. The financial statements are prepared on accrual basis.
3. ADOPTION OF NEW AND REVISED STANDARDS
(i) New and amended standards and interpretations in issue but not yet 
effective in the year ended 30 June 2021.
Standard Effective date and impact:
IPSAS 41: 
Financial 
InstrumentsApplicable: 1st January 2022:
The objective of IPSAS 41 is to establish principles for the 
financial reporting of financial assets and liabilities that 
will present relevant and useful information to users of 
financial statements for their assessment of the amounts, 
timing and uncertainty of an entity’s future cash flows.
IPSAS 41 provides users of financial statements with 
more useful information than IPSAS 29, by: 
•			Applying	 a	single	classification	 and	measurement	
model for financial assets that considers the 
characteristics of the asset’s cash flows and the 
objective for which the asset is held;123
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Standard Effective date and impact:
•					Applying	 a	single	forward-looking	 expected	 credit	loss	
model that is applicable to all financial instruments 
subject to impairment testing; and 
•	 	Applying	 an	improved	 hedge	accounting	 model	
that broadens the hedging arrangements in scope 
of the guidance. The model develops a strong link 
between an entity’s risk management strategies and 
the accounting treatment for instruments held as part 
of the risk management strategy
Amendments 
to Other IPSAS 
resulting from 
IPSAS 41, Financial 
InstrumentsApplicable: 1st January 2022:
(a) Amendments to IPSAS 5, to update the guidance 
related to the components of borrowing costs which 
were inadvertently omitted when IPSAS 41 was 
issued.
(b) Amendments to IPSAS 30, regarding illustrative 
examples on hedging and credit risk which were 
inadvertently omitted when IPSAS 41 was issued.
(c) Amendments to IPSAS 30, to update the guidance 
for accounting for financial guarantee contracts 
which were inadvertently omitted when IPSAS 41 was 
issued.
Amendments to IPSAS 33, to update the guidance on 
classifying financial instruments on initial adoption of 
accrual basis IPSAS which were inadvertently omitted 
when IPSAS 41 was issued.
IPSAS 42: 
Social BenefitsApplicable: 1st January 2022
The objective of this Standard is to improve the 
relevance, faithful representativeness and comparability 
of the information that a reporting entity provides 
in its financial statements about social benefits. The 
information provided should help users of the financial 
statements and general purpose financial reports assess:
(a) The nature of such social benefits provided by the 
entity; 
(b) The key features of the operation of those social 
benefit schemes; and 
(c) The impact of such social benefits provided on the 
entity’s financial performance, financial position and 
cash flows.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED124
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (ii) Early adoption of standards
The entity did not early – adopt any new or amended standards in year 2021.
4. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
(a)  Revenue recognition
(i)  Revenue from non-exchange transactions  
Fees, taxes and fines
The Authority recognizes revenues from fees, taxes and fines when the event 
occurs and the asset recognition criteria are met. To the extent that there is a 
related condition attached that would give rise to a liability to repay the amount, 
deferred income is recognized instead of revenue. Other non-exchange 
revenues are recognized when it is probable that the future economic benefits 
or service potential associated with the asset will flow to the entity and the fair 
value of the asset can be measured reliably.
Transfers from other government entities
Revenues from non-exchange transactions with other government entities are 
measured at fair value and recognized on obtaining control of the asset (cash, 
goods, services and property) if the transfer is free from conditions and it is 
probable that the economic benefits or service potential related to the asset will 
flow to the entity and can be measured reliably.
(ii)  Revenue from exchange transactions  
Rendering of services
The Authority recognizes revenue from rendering of services by reference to 
the stage of completion when the outcome of the transaction can be estimated 
reliably. The stage of completion is measured by reference to labour hours 
incurred to date as a percentage of total estimated labour hours.  
Where the contract outcome cannot be measured reliably, revenue is recognized 
only to the extent that the expenses incurred are recoverable.  
Sale of goods
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognized when the significant risks and 
rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer, usually on delivery 
of the goods and when the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and it 
is probable that the economic benefits or service potential associated with the 
transaction will flow to the entity.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED125
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Interest income
Interest income is accrued using the effective yield method. The effective 
yield discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the 
financial asset to that asset’s net carrying amount. The method applies this yield 
to the principal outstanding to determine interest income each period.  
(b)  Budget information 
The original budget for FY 2020 - 2021 was approved by the management 
of the Authority. Subsequent revisions were made to the approved budget in 
accordance with specific approvals from the appropriate authorities. 
The entity’s budget is prepared on a different basis to the actual income and 
expenditure disclosed in the financial statements. The financial statements are 
prepared on accrual basis using a classification based on the nature of expenses 
in the statement of financial performance, whereas the budget is prepared on a 
cash basis. The amounts in the financial statements were recast from the accrual 
basis to the cash basis and reclassified by presentation to be on the same 
basis as the approved budget. A comparison of budget and actual amounts, 
prepared on a comparable basis to the approved budget, is then presented in 
the statement of comparison of budget and actual amounts. 
In addition to the Basis difference, adjustments to amounts in the financial 
statements are also made for differences in the formats and classification 
schemes adopted for the presentation of the financial statements and the 
approved budget.
(c) Taxes 
Current income tax
Current income tax assets and liabilities for the current period are measured at 
the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities. 
The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are 
enacted or substantively enacted, at the reporting date in the area where the 
Entity operates and generates taxable income.
Current income tax relating to items recognized directly in net assets is 
recognized in net assets and not in the statement of financial performance. 
Management periodically evaluates positions taken in the tax returns with 
respect to situations in which applicable tax regulations are subject to 
interpretation and establishes provisions where appropriate.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED126
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (d)  Property, plant and equipment 
All property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated 
depreciation and impairment losses. Cost includes expenditure that is 
directly attributable to the acquisition of the items. When significant parts of 
property, plant and equipment are required to be replaced at intervals, the 
entity recognizes such parts as individual assets with specific useful lives and 
depreciates them accordingly. Likewise, when a major inspection is performed, 
its cost is recognized in the carrying amount of the plant and equipment as 
a replacement if the recognition criteria are satisfied. All other repair and 
maintenance costs are recognized in surplus or deficit as incurred. Where an 
asset is acquired in a non-exchange transaction for nil or nominal consideration 
the asset is initially measured at its fair value.
(e)  Leases 
Finance leases are leases that transfer substantially all of the risks and benefits 
incidental to ownership of the leased item to the Entity. Assets held under a 
finance lease are capitalized at the commencement of the lease at the fair value 
of the leased property or, if lower, at the present value of the future minimum 
lease payments. The Entity also recognizes the associated lease liability at the 
inception of the lease. The liability recognized is measured as the present value 
of the future minimum lease payments at initial recognition.
Subsequent to initial recognition, lease payments are apportioned between 
finance charges and reduction of the lease liability so as to achieve a constant 
rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability. Finance charges are 
recognized as finance costs in surplus or deficit.
An asset held under a finance lease is depreciated over the useful life of the 
asset. However, if there is no reasonable certainty that the Entity will obtain 
ownership of the asset by the end of the lease term, the asset is depreciated 
over the shorter of the estimated useful life of the asset and the lease term.
Operating leases are leases that do not transfer substantially all the risks and 
benefits incidental to ownership of the leased item to the Entity. Operating 
lease payments are recognized as an operating expense in surplus or deficit on 
a straight-line basis over the lease term.
(f)  Intangible assets 
Intangible assets acquired separately are initially recognized at cost. The cost of 
intangible assets acquired in a non-exchange transaction is their fair value at the 
date of the exchange. Following initial recognition, intangible assets are carried 
at cost less any accumulated amortization and accumulated impairment losses. NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED127
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Internally generated intangible assets, excluding capitalized development 
costs, are not capitalized and expenditure is reflected in surplus or deficit in 
the period in which the expenditure is incurred. The useful life of the intangible 
assets is assessed as either finite or indefinite.
(g)  Depreciation 
The Assets are depreciated as and when they are available for use by the 
Authority. Depreciation charge is calculated on a straight line basis for the 
various categories of assets as follows:
Motor vehicles   25.0%
Equipment and computers        33.3%
Furniture and fittings   12.5%
Office partitions   12.5%
Intangible assets   33.3%
(h)  Financial instruments 
(i)  Financial assets
Initial recognition and measurement
Financial assets within the scope of IPSAS 29 Financial Instruments: Recognition 
and Measurement are classified as financial assets at fair value through surplus 
or deficit, loans and receivables, held-to-maturity investments or available-for-
sale financial assets, as appropriate. The Entity determines the classification of 
its financial assets at initial recognition.
Loans and receivables
Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or 
determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market. After initial 
measurement, such financial assets are subsequently measured at amortized 
cost using the effective interest method, less impairment. Amortized cost is 
calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and 
fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective interest rate. Losses arising 
from impairment are recognized in the surplus or deficit.
Held-to-maturity
Non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments and fixed 
maturities are classified as held to maturity when the Entity has the positive 
intention and ability to hold it to maturity. After initial measurement, held-
to-maturity investments are measured at amortized cost using the effective 
interest method, less impairment. Amortized cost is calculated by taking into NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED128
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 account any discount or premium on acquisition and fees or costs that are an 
integral part of the effective interest rate. The losses arising from impairment are 
recognized in surplus or deficit.
Impairment of financial assets
The Entity assesses at each reporting date whether there is objective evidence 
that a financial asset or an entity of financial assets is impaired. A financial asset 
or an entity of financial assets is deemed to be impaired if, and only if, there is 
objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that has 
occurred after the initial recognition of the asset (an incurred ‘loss event’) and 
that loss event has an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the financial 
asset or the entity of financial assets that can be reliably estimated. Evidence of 
impairment may include the following indicators:
•	 The	 debtors	 or	an	entity	of	debtors	 are	experiencing	 significant	 financial	
difficulty
•	 Default	or	delinquency	in	interest	or	principal	payments
•	 The	 probability	 that	debtors	 will	enter	bankruptcy	 or	other	financial	
reorganization
•	 Observable	 data	indicates	 a	measurable	 decrease	 in	estimated	 future	cash	
flows (e.g. changes in arrears or economic conditions that correlate with 
defaults)
(ii)  Financial liabilities
Initial recognition and measurement
Financial liabilities within the scope of IPSAS 29 are classified as financial 
liabilities at fair value through surplus or deficit or loans and borrowings, as 
appropriate. The Entity determines the classification of its financial liabilities at 
initial recognition. All financial liabilities are recognized initially at fair value and, 
in the case of loans and borrowings, plus directly attributable transaction costs.
Loans and borrowing
After initial recognition, interest bearing loans and borrowings are subsequently 
measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method. Gains and losses 
are recognized in surplus or deficit when the liabilities are derecognized as well 
as through the effective interest method amortization process. Amortized cost 
is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and 
fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective interest rate.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED129
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (i)  Inventories 
Inventory is measured at cost upon initial recognition. To the extent that 
inventory was received through non-exchange transactions (for no cost or for a 
nominal cost), the cost of the inventory is its fair value at the date of acquisition.
Costs incurred in bringing each product to its present location and conditions 
are accounted for, as follows:
•	 Raw	materials:	purchase	cost	using	the	weighted	average	cost	method
•	 Finished	 goods	and	work	in	progress:	 cost	of	direct	materials	 and	labor	and	
a proportion of manufacturing overheads based on the normal operating 
capacity, but excluding borrowing costs
After initial recognition, inventory is measured at the lower of cost and net 
realizable value. However, to the extent that a class of inventory is distributed 
or deployed at no charge or for a nominal charge, that class of inventory is 
measured at the lower of cost and current replacement cost.
Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of 
operations, less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs 
necessary to make the sale, exchange, or distribution. Inventories are recognized 
as an expense when deployed for utilization or consumption in the ordinary 
course of operations of the Entity.
(j)  Provisions 
Provisions are recognized when the Entity has a present obligation (legal or 
constructive) as a result of a past event, it is probable that an outflow of resources 
embodying economic benefits or service potential will be required to settle the 
obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Where the Entity expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed, for 
example, under an insurance contract, the reimbursement is recognized as a 
separate asset only when the reimbursement is virtually certain. The expense 
relating to any provision is presented in the statement of financial performance 
net of any reimbursement.
Contingent liabilities
The Entity does not recognize a contingent liability, but discloses details of any 
contingencies in the notes to the financial statements, unless the possibility of 
an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits or service potential is 
remote.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED130
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 Contingent assets
The Entity does not recognize a contingent asset, but discloses details of 
a possible asset whose existence is contingent on the occurrence or non-
occurrence of one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control 
of the Entity in the notes to the financial statements. Contingent assets are 
assessed continually to ensure that developments are appropriately reflected 
in the financial statements. If it has become virtually certain that an inflow of 
economic benefits or service potential will arise and the asset’s value can be 
measured reliably, the asset and the related revenue are recognized in the 
financial statements of the period in which the change occurs.
(k)  Nature and purpose of reserves
The Entity creates and maintains reserves in terms of specific requirements. 
(l)  Changes in accounting policies and estimates 
The Entity recognizes the effects of changes in accounting policy retrospectively. 
The effects of changes in accounting policy are applied prospectively if 
retrospective application is impractical.
(m) Employee benefits 
Retirement benefit plans
The Entity provides retirement benefits for its employees and directors. Defined 
contribution plans are post-employment benefit plans under which an entity 
pays fixed contributions into a separate entity (a fund), and will have no legal 
or constructive obligation to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold 
sufficient assets to pay all employee benefits relating to employee service in 
the current and prior periods. The contributions to fund obligations for the 
payment of retirement benefits are charged against income in the year in which 
they become payable.
(n)  Foreign currency transactions 
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially accounted for at the ruling rate of 
exchange on the date of the transaction. Trade creditors or debtors denominated 
in foreign currency are reported at the statement of financial position reporting 
date by applying the exchange rate on that date. Exchange differences arising 
from the settlement of creditors, or from the reporting of creditors at rates 
different from those at which they were initially recorded during the period, are 
recognized as income or expenses in the period in which they arise.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED131
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 (o) Borrowing costs 
Borrowing costs are capitalized against qualifying assets as part of property, 
plant and equipment. Such borrowing costs are capitalized over the period 
during which the asset is being acquired or constructed and borrowings have 
been incurred. Capitalization ceases when construction of the asset is complete. 
Further borrowing costs are charged to the statement of financial performance.
(p) Related parties  
The Authority regards a related party as a person or an entity with the ability to 
exert control individually or jointly, or to exercise significant influence over the 
Authority, or vice versa. Members of key management are regarded as related 
parties and comprise Managers and Directors including the Director General.
The following transactions were carried out with related parties:
(i) Public Procurement Regulatory Board:  This is the Board that oversees the 
operations and governance of the Authority. The Board is responsible for 
providing strategic direction, approval of policies and overall governance 
of the Authority.
(ii) Public Procurement Administrative Review Board:  The Authority has a 
duty to provide Secretariat and administrative services as well budgetary 
support to the Review.
(iii) Management team:  The management team oversees the day to day 
operations of the Authority and also has the responsibility of formulating 
policies that govern operations of the Authority.
(iv) Kenya Institute of Supplies Management (KISM):  The National Treasury 
has been allocating KISM part of the funds appropriated to PPRA by 
Parliament. 
 The Authority is a Government institution wholly owned by the Government 
of Kenya. The National Treasury is the parent ministry. The Authority relies 
on GoK for funding with GoK funds making up 97% of its annual revenues. 
During the year under review, the Authority received GoK budget funding 
of Ksh 306,987,152 against an allocation of Ksh 349,487,151.  
(q)  Service concession arrangements 
The Entity analyses all aspects of service concession arrangements that it enters 
into in determining the appropriate accounting treatment and disclosure 
requirements. In particular, where a private party contributes an asset to the 
arrangement, the Entity recognizes that asset when, and only when, it controls 
or regulates the services the operator must provide together with the asset, 
to whom it must provide them, and at what price. In the case of assets other NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED132
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 than ’whole-of-life’ assets, it controls, through ownership, beneficial entitlement 
or otherwise – any significant residual interest in the asset at the end of the 
arrangement. 
Any assets so recognized are measured at their fair value. To the extent that an 
asset has been recognized, the Entity also recognizes a corresponding liability, 
adjusted by a cash consideration paid or received.
(r)  Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and cash at bank, short-term 
deposits on call and highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three 
months or less, which are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and are 
subject to insignificant risk of changes in value. Bank account balances include 
amounts held at the Central Bank of Kenya and at various commercial banks 
at the end of the financial year. For the purposes of these financial statements, 
cash and cash equivalents also include short term cash imprests and advances 
to authorized public officers and/or institutions which were not surrendered or 
accounted for at the end of the financial year.
(s)  Comparative figures
Where necessary comparative figures for the previous financial year have been 
amended or reconfigured to conform to the required changes in presentation.
5. SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND SOURCES OF 
ESTIMATION UNCERTAINTY 
The preparation of the Entity’s financial statements in conformity with IPSAS 
requires management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that 
affect the reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities, and 
the disclosure of contingent liabilities, at the end of the reporting period. 
However, uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in 
outcomes that require a material adjustment to the carrying amount of the asset 
or liability affected in future periods.
        
Estimates and assumptions
The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation 
uncertainty at the reporting date, that have a significant risk of causing a 
material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the 
next financial year, are described below. The Entity based its assumptions and 
estimates on parameters available when the consolidated financial statements 
were prepared. NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED133
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 However, existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments 
may change due to market changes or circumstances arising beyond the control 
of the Entity. Such changes are reflected in the assumptions when they occur. 
IPSAS 1.140
Useful lives and residual values
The useful lives and residual values of assets are assessed using the following 
indicators to inform potential future use and value from disposal:
•	 The	condition	 of	the	asset	based	on	the	assessment	 of	experts	employed	 by	
the Entity
•	 The	 nature	of	the	asset,	its	susceptibility	 and	adaptability	 to	changes	 in	
technology and processes
•	 The	nature	of 	the	processes	in	which	the	asset	is	deployed
•	 Availability	of 	funding	to	replace	the	asset
•	 Changes	in	the	market	in	relation	to	the	asset
Provisions
Provisions were raised and management determined an estimate based on the 
information available. Additional disclosure of these estimates of provisions is 
included in Note 24. 
Provisions are measured at the management’s best estimate of the expenditure 
required to settle the obligation at the reporting date, and are discounted to 
present value where the effect is material.
(u)  Subsequent events 
There have been no events subsequent to the financial year end with a significant 
impact on the financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2018.
6. UNCONDITIONAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS 
Operational grants Government of Kenya funding of PPRA operations through 
Exchequer during the financial year.  
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Operational Grant  306,987,152  340,000,000 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED134
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED
7. RENDERING SERVICES
Appeals fee: Relates to fees paid by parties seeking administrative review of 
public procurement disputes.
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Income from appeals 23,979,983 22,125,022 
8. FINANCE INCOME 
The interest income earned during the financial year is for the staff loans scheme 
and not normal operations of the Authority.  
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Interest Income         19,175    8,200,800 
The interest income was earned from loans to staff.
9. OTHER INCOME
This includes income from the sources listed below:
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Other income 4,689,025 0
Other income comprises of Ksh 4,689,025 on the NBK account which includes 
Ksh 4.4m received as insurance compensation for fully depreciated vehicle that 
had an accident and was written off.
10. EMPLOYEE COSTS
This comprises of the staff personnel emoluments and employer pension 
contribution. A breakdown of the employee costs is as shown below: 
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Salaries and wages  122,657,467  124,328,000 
Housing benefits & allowances    51,886,323    52,612,333 
Pension & Gratuity contributions    24,925,047    25,651,800 
Total 199,468,837 202,592,133 135
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED
11. BOARD EXPENSES
This comprises of costs related to the Public Procurement Regulatory Board and 
the Public Procurement Administrative Review Board.
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Administrative Review Board  other expenses         3,716,053         7,360,972 
Administrative Review Board Emoluments       30,164,000       28,404,000 
Regulatory Board other expenses      3,978,180      2,392,802 
Regulatory Board Emoluments 8,360,000      7,000,000 
Total   46,218,233  45,157,774 
12. GENERAL EXPENSES 
Below are the general expenses of the Authority.
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
 Description
Advertising   3,238,698         244,152 
Bank charges 264,505 298,170
Branding PPRA       107,120         409,210 
Car Park expenses    3,312,000      7,934,400 
Catering    1,411,756     2,465,475 
Club membership       355,000        210,500 
Conference and delegations    1,272,268      3,392,240 
Consumables       376,065           27,390 
Corporate Security & Safety  Management 0        561,100 
Corporate Social Investment       416,300 0
Disposal expenses        17,500 0
Fuel and Oil      762,000        732,950 
Insurance Costs                                                                     20,940,656   20,304,494 
ISO expenses      377,000 0
Knowledge management 0        743,000 
Legal expenses       612,110            5,500 
Office Expenses   1,045,326      1,312,647 
Printing & stationery    1,593,237     3,360,112 
PPRA staff loans scheme expense 40,000 0
Rent & utilities  18,476,102   18,006,036 136
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Software upgrades and licences      426,400      1,493,019 
Staff welfare   2,806,800     1,445,520 
Telecommunication   5,699,537     7,500,000 
Trade shows and exhibitions 5,000         293,000 
Training    2,730,064      5,116,937 
Travel & accommodation  22,572,986   29,476,279 
Total 88,858,430 105,033,961 
13. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE  
The Authority spent Ksh 2,939,885 on maintenance of vehicles, equipment, 
computers and general maintenance. A breakdown of the expenditure is shown 
below:
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Vehicles      748,790  1,024,554 
Equipment 2,076,522  1,982,720 
Property      145,573    119,130 
Total  2,970,885 3,126,404 
14. CONTRACTED SERVICES
These are services outsourced by the Authority. 
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Audit fees       858,400       858,400 
Cleaning Services Fees    2,284,308    2,394,020 
Guarding Services    836,768 21874
Consultancy Fees 10,345,740  29,658,020 
Total 14,325,216 32,932,314 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED137
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 15. FINANCE COSTS
These consist of costs associated with access to credit or other funding 
opportunities.
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Bank charges  0  0 
The Authority did not have any finance costs during the period under review.
16. DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION 
The depreciation charge for the year comprises of:
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Property and equipment    4,790,459    7,008,226 
Intangible assets   7,390,009    3,005,631 
Total 12,180,468 10,013,857 
17. CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
NBK Account  56,283,092    93,192,768 
KCB Account 98,400,636  100,000,000 
Cash on hand and in transit 0 137
Total  154,683,728 193,192,905 
18. RECEIVABLES FROM EXCHANGE TRANSACTIONS
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Prepayments  13,135,092  10,863,983 
Other receivables 11,128,768       243,307 
Refundable Deposits         15,000    379,000 
Total  24,278,860 11,486,290 
Receivables from exchange transactions of Ksh 11,128,768 comprise of Ksh 
9,237,593 for PPRA and Ksh 1,891,175 for loan due from a member of staff for 
purchase of a vehicle.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED138
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 19. RECEIVABLES FROM NON-EXCHANGE TRANSACTIONS
2021 2020
 PPRA  Ksh
Imprest advance  4,087,693    6,596,017 
Salary advance    502,700       976,142 
The National Treasury 57,371,788 0
Total 61,962,181   7,572,159 
20. PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT
Motor 
Vehicles Equipment 
& 
ComputersFurniture 
& Fittings Office 
Partitions Total
Cost  Ksh  Ksh  Ksh  Ksh  Ksh 
At 1st July 
201968,041,313 65,450,703 16,974,005 45,158,490 195,624,511 
Additions 0 629,500 408,995 0     1,038,495 
At 30th June 
202068,041,313 66,080,203 17,383,000 45,158,490 196,663,006 
Additions 0 1,561,495 2,095,155 0     3,656,650 
At 30th June 
202168,041,313 67,641,698 19,478,155 45,158,490 200,319,656 
Depreciation & Impairment
At 1st July 
201967,709,591 55,756,779 12,430,147 44,113,444 180,009,961 
Depreciation       331,722 5,502,228 921,438 252,838     7,008,226 
Transfers/
adjustments0 0 0 0 0
At 30th June 
202068,041,313 61,259,007 13,351,585 44,366,282 187,018,187 
Depreciation 0    3,636,774 1,084,717 68,968     4,790,459 
Disposal    654,273        654,273 
At 30th June 
202168,041,313 64,895,781 14,436,302 45,089,523 192,462,919 
Net book 
values    
At 30th June 
20210 2,745,917 5,041,853 68,967     7,856,737 
At 30th June 
20200 4,821,196 4,031,415 792,208     9,644,819 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED139
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 21. INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Intangible assets comprises ICT Systems and software used by the Authority in 
its operations. 
2021 2020
Cost  Ksh Ksh
At beginning of the year     58,469,442     44,491,170 
Additions 0      13,978,272 
At end of the year     58,469,442     58,469,442 
Amortization and Impairment   
At beginning of the year     42,942,757     39,937,126 
Amortization        7,390,009        3,005,631 
At end of the year     50,332,766     42,942,757 
Net book value       8,136,676     15,526,685 
22. WORK-IN-PROGRESS
Relates to implementation of the Fleet Management System. 
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Work-In-Progress 0  945,000 
Balance 0 945,000 
23. TRADE & OTHER PAYABLES FROM EXCHANGE   
TRANSACTIONS
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Trade Payables 7,875,810    9,489,845 
Other Payables 10,695,720  11,530,354 
Total 18,571,530 21,020,199 
Other payables Ksh 10,695,720 comprise of Ksh 10,382,179 for PPRA and Ksh 
313,541 being payables for the Loans Scheme.
24. PROVISIONS
Provision made to cater for audit of FY 2019/2020 books of accounts and 
outstanding staff leave days as at 30th June 2021.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED140
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Provisions 20,676,200 20,676,200 
Total 20,676,200  20,676,200 
25. DEFERRED INCOME
Is income received for a specific purpose i.e establishment of regional offices 
which had not been utilized at the end of the financial year.
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
National Government    50,000,000 0
Total Deferred income   50,000,000 0
The deferred income movement is as follows:
2021 2020
 Ksh Ksh
Balance brought forward 0  220,000,000 
Additions    50,000,000 0
Transfer to Other Govt Institutions 0   (220,000,000)
Balance carried forward   50,000,000 0
26. ACCUMULATED FUND
The movement in revenue reserves for the year ended 30th June 2021 is 
shown below:
2021 2020
 PPRA  Ksh
Balance as at 1st July 196,671,459  439,602,015 
Adjustment of provisions  0         (21,065)
Transfers to other Govt Institutions 0 (214,080,700)
Surplus for the year (29,001,007)  (28,828,791)
Balance as at 30th June 167,670,452 196,671,459 
Note:
The accumulated fund amount of Ksh 167,670,452 includes Ksh 99,978,270 for 
the PPRA Staff Loans Scheme.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED141
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 27. EXTRA-ORDINARY ITEM
The Authority’s lease of office space at Mombasa Trade Centre ended on 30th 
June 2020. Consequently, the Authority was required to vacate the offices on 
1st July 2020 and remove the partitions. The salvaged items of the partition 
were disposed through donation to Kenya Ferry Services. The net book value of 
the partitions as at 1st July 2020 was Ksh 654,273 and this was written off in the 
books of accounts.
2021 2020
PPRA PPRA LOANS 
SCHEME  Ksh
Gain/(loss) on disposal  (654,273) 0 0
28. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
The Authority’s activities expose it to a variety of financial risks including 
credit and liquidity risks. The overall risk management programme focuses on 
unpredictability of changes in the business.
29. CONTINGENT ASSETS 
The Authority had no contingent assets as at 30th June 2021.
30. CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Litigation Matters: As at 30th June 2021, there were some cases before the courts 
in which the Authority is a party that had not been concluded. The outcome of 
the cases and the likely costs of the suits (damages/other court awards) that the 
Authority may have to bear cannot be estimated with certainty. This disclosure 
has been provided in conformity with IPSAS 19.
M/S SPA Infosuv East Africa Ltd 
The Authority entered into contract No. PPRA/09/2015-2016 on 12th January 
2017 with M/S SPA Infosuv East Africa Ltd to conduct country procurement 
assessment for a contract price of Ksh. 16,285,000. An amount of Ksh. 3,257,000 
was paid to the consultant on 30th April, 2019 in respect of submission of 
inception report. Audit review of the correspondences between the Authority 
and the consultant reveals that there is a pending disputed invoice 031019 
amounting to Ksh. 13,028,000 which has accrued interest but has not been 
disclosed as a contingent liability in the financial statements.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED142
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 31. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The following transactions were carried out with related parties:
(i) Public Procurement Regulatory Board: This is the Board that oversees the 
operations and governance of the Authority. The Board is responsible for 
providing strategic direction, approval of policies and overall governance 
of the Authority.
(iii) Public Procurement Administrative Review Board: The Authority has a 
duty to provide Secretariat and administrative services as well budgetary 
support to the Review.
(iii) Management team: The management team oversees the day to day 
operations of the Authority and also has the responsibility of formulating 
policies that govern operations of the Authority.
(iv) Kenya Institute of Supplies Management (KISM): The National Treasury has 
been allocating KISM part of the funds appropriated to PPRA by Parliament. 
(v) Government of Kenya and The National Treasury: The Authority is a 
Government institution wholly owned by the Government of Kenya. The 
National Treasury is the parent ministry. The Authority relies on GoK for 
funding with GoK funds making up 97% of its annual revenues. 
During the year under review, the Authority received GoK budget funding of 
Ksh 306,987,152 against an allocation of Ksh 349,487,151.  
32. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
There were no subsequent events after year end that affect the Authority and 
that would affect the decisions made by a third party.
33. CURRENCY
The financial statements are presented in Kenya Shillings (Kshs).NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED143
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 ANNEXES
ANNEX 1: 
LIST OF PES THAT SUBMITTED ANNUAL 
PROCUREMENT PLANS
No Procuring Entity Date  of 
Submission 
of the PlanAnnual 
Procurement 
Budget (Kes.)Reserved 
Procurement 
Spend (Kes)Percen-
tage 
Reserved 
(>=30%)
1. Nyeri Water and 
Sanitation14/7/2020             838,200.00          755,000.00            
90.07 
2. County Gov't of 
Nyeri09/01/2020       519,517,523.50          
381,164,523.57                
73.37 
3. Thaka University 27/08/2020       412,040,587.00          
284,840,587.00                
69.13 
4. Lapsset Corridor 
Development 
Authority09/03/2020       128,382,460.00            
87,883,500.00                
68.45 
5. Kenya School of 
Government09/10/2020  1,524,800,743.50 914,880,446.10 60.00 
6. County Govern -
ment of Kirinyaga26/8/2020 597,373,529.49 281,290,682.00  47.09 
7. National Youth 
Council07/03/2020     37,150,000.00 17,350,000.00   46.70 
8. Kenya Ferry 08/10/2020 361,234,018.00 135,717,060.00     37.57 
9. County 
Government of 
Uasin Gishu31/08/2020 2,200,000,000.00 738,467,025.00   33.57 
10. The Judiciary 07/07/2020 4,702,633,160.00 1,576,590,441.00    33.53 
11. Kenya Institute for 
the Blind16/09/2020        28,928,622.00         9,257,158.00             
32.00 
12. NGOs 
Co-ordination 
Board31/08/2020        36,795,000.00       11,708,000.00             
31.82 
13. Jomo Kenyatta 
University of 
Technology09/08/2020     655,427,781.41    207,533,127.22            
31.66 
14. Sacco Societies 
Regulatory 
Authority14/7/2020        97,918,580.00       30,908,000.00             
31.57 144
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No Procuring Entity Date  of 
Submission 
of the PlanAnnual 
Procurement 
Budget (Kes.)Reserved 
Procurement 
Spend (Kes)Percen-
tage 
Reserved 
(>=30%)
15. Coast Institute of 
Technology14/7/2020     224,046,724.00       69,362,000.00            
30.96 
16. Maseno University 24/09/2020     413,565,934.00   127,494,229.00            
30.83 
17. National Council 
for Population and 
Development09/10/2020        89,545,832.00       27,401,025.00             
30.60 
18. Kenya School of 
Law07/08/2020     183,226,325.00       56,067,255.45             
30.60 
19. Kenya Water 
Institute31/08/2020    178,297,000.00       54,558,882.00             
30.60 
20. Kenya literature 
Bureau09/02/2020     447,250,000.00    136,858,500.00             
30.60 
21. Kenya National 
Examination 
Council31/08/2020     830,617,918.00    254,169,082.50             
30.60 
22. Mathenge 
Technical Training 
Institute13/08/2020     127,079,419.00       38,881,839.00            
30.60 
23. Nairobi Centre for 
International 
Arbitration08/05/2020        56,693,950.00       17,169,660.00            
30.28 
24. Export Processing 
Authority31/08/2020     194,140,040.00       58,422,012.00            
30.09 
25. National Oil 
Corporation of 
Kenya20/7/2020  1,408,964,288.00    423,263,304.00             
30.04 
26. State Department 
of Planning19/8/2020  2,737,836,211.00    821,550,863.00             
30.01 
27. Kenya National 
Trading 
Corporation20/7/2020        40,650,000.00       12,195,150.00             
30.00 
28. Anti-Doping 
Agency Kenya30/7/2020        71,501,075.00       21,450,323.00            
30.00 
29. Public Sector 
Accounting Board31/8/2020        97,273,018.00       29,181,906.00             
30.00 
30. National Industrial 
Training Authority20/7/2020        40,650,500.00       12,195,150.00             
30.00 
31. National Council 
for Persons with  
Disabilities30/7/2020 228,129,905.00 68,438,971.50    30.00 145
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No Procuring Entity Date  of 
Submission 
of the PlanAnnual 
Procurement 
Budget (Kes.)Reserved 
Procurement 
Spend (Kes)Percen-
tage 
Reserved 
(>=30%)
32. Runyenjes 
Technical Training 
Institute27/08/2020 18,851,500.00 5,655,450.00   30.00 
33. Commodities Fund 27/8/2020 8,649,190.00 2,594,757.00    30.00 
34. LAP Fund 28/8/2020 390,304,980.00 117,091,494.00    30.00 
35. Tourism Regulatory 
Authority28/8/2020 38,370,597.00 11,511,179.10    30.00 
36. State Department 
of Infrastructure09/02/2020 1,059,792,596.00 317,937,778.80   30.00 
37. Kenya Tourism 
Board09/02/2020 435,580,000.00 130,674,000.00    30.00 
38. Ministry of 
Education21/08/2020 2,737,836,211.00 821,350,863.00   30.00 
39. Kisumu National 
Polytechnic10/09/2020 218,881,609.98 65,664,482.85     30.00 
40. Kenya Promotion & 
Branding Agency17/09/2020 356,431,758.00 106,929,527.00   30.00 
41. Machakos 
University31/08/2020 261,896,329.00 78,568,898.00                
30.00 
42. Kenya Institute for 
Public Policy 
Research & Analysis31/08/2020 261,896,329.00 78,568,898.00                
30.00 
43. Kisii University 25/8/2020 176,464,436.00 52,939,330.00                
30.00 
44. Public Procurement 
Regulatory 
Authority14/09/2020     50,568,000.00 15,170,400.00                  
30.00 
45. Kenya Institute of 
Special Education14/8/2020 239,983,179.00 71,349,953.70                
29.73 
46. Nuclear Power 
&Energy Agency09/09/2020 250,922,754.00 73,925,000.00                
29.46 
47. County Gov't of 
Nyeri28/8/2020 2,901,920,416.00 802,051,503.00                
27.64 
48. University of 
Eldoret09/04/2020 532,208,961.50 140,499,310.19                
26.40 
49. Kenya Law Reform 
Commission09/02/2020 51,210,999.00 12,440,140.00                
24.29 
50. National Housing 
Corporation16/7/2020 1,275,005.00 302,501.50   23.73 
51. Women Enterprise 
Fund31/8/2020 151,198,045.00 32,198,045.00   21.30 146
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No Procuring Entity Date  of 
Submission 
of the PlanAnnual 
Procurement 
Budget (Kes.)Reserved 
Procurement 
Spend (Kes)Percen-
tage 
Reserved 
(>=30%)
52. Murang'a 
University of 
Technology43,959.00 431,567,158.00 89,429,000.00  20.72 
53. Kenyatta National 
Hospital14/7/2020 474,000,000.00 94,000,000.00  19.83 
54. National Aids 
Council31/08/2020 577,601,000.00 108,318,588.76 18.75 
55. Commission on 
Revenue Allocation 161,930,555.00 28,933,463.00   17.87 
56. Kenya Forest 
Service24/8/2020 1,533,937,297.00 244,724,189.00   15.95 
57. Kenya Medical 
Laboratory 
Technicians & 
Technologists 
Board09/04/2020 65,004,927.60 9,711,452.98   14.94 
58. Commission  on 
Administrative 
Justice16/7/2020 137,393,200.00 19,927,192.00 14.50 
59. Multimedia 
University of Kenya31/08/2020 491,670,000.00 56,751,000.00 11.54 
60. Malindi Water & 
Sewerage co. Ltd28/08/2020 158,707,000.00 17,007,000.00   10.72 
61. Kenya National 
Highway Authority13/7/2020   25,833,475,000.00 2,645,559,297.00            
10.24 
62. ICT Authority 26/08/2020 1,375,880,016.00   130,764,004.80              
9.50 
63. University of 
Nairobi31/08/2020 1,977,741,254.33    186,090,352.00              
9.41 
64. Tourism Fund 27/08/2020     307,680,245.00      25,445,000.00              
8.27 
65. Chuka University 09/04/2020  1,965,444,490.00    139,000,000.00               
7.07 
66. National Transport 
and Safety 
Authority25/8/2020  1,279,860,912.26       73,596,832.11               
5.75 
67. Kenya Deposit 
Insurance 
Corporation09/02/2020    660,772,500.00       31,042,500.00               
4.70 
68. Engineers Board of 
Kenya24/8/2020     137,026,780.00         5,424,834.00               
3.96 147
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No Procuring Entity Date  of 
Submission 
of the PlanAnnual 
Procurement 
Budget (Kes.)Reserved 
Procurement 
Spend (Kes)Percen-
tage 
Reserved 
(>=30%)
69. Capital Market 
Authority07/07/2020     922,820,990.00       35,600,650.00      3.86 
70. Karatina Unversity 18/8/2020     130,349,547.33         3,988,961.48     3.06 
71. Nairobi Water& 
Sewerage Co Ltd14/8/2020     2,126,323,375.00 63,897,013.00      3.01 
72. Commodities Fund 27/08/2020           8,649,190.00 172,983.80        2.00 
73. Nyamira County 
Gov't31/8/2020     2,088,328,221.00 38,100,504.77       1.82 
74. Unclaimed 
Financial Asset 
Authority19/8/2020       558,326,140.69 5,355,200.00      0.96 
75. National 
Construction 
Authority24/8/2020     2,188,180,000.00 18,186,510.00       0.83 
76. Privatization 
Commission18/8/2020         66,844,731.00 486,704.00       0.73 
77. Kenya Leather 
Development 
Council10/01/2020     1,402,087,479.00 9,843,599.00        0.70 
78. Kenya Film 
Commission09/04/2020       147,693,145.80 973,863.00       0.66 
79. Kenya Revenue 
Authority17/8/2020     5,937,822,115.33 5,283,572.24      0.09 
80. Athi Works 
Development 
Agency31/8/2020   18,834,667,535.00 15,052,551.20     0.08 
81. Thika Water and 
Sewerage Co.43,990.00       279,250,000.00                  
14,500.00                  
0.01 
82. Gusii water 
Sanitation Co.24/6/2020      69,257,000.00                             -                      
-   
83. Kenya Roads Board 07/09/2020       539,900,000.00                             -                       
-   
84. Kenya Urban Roads 
Authority13/07/2020       642,466,100.00                             -                       
-   
85. Kenya Investment 
Authority24/7/2020           2,040,000.00                             -                       
-   
86. Kenya 
Universities and 
Colleges Central 
Placement Service08/06/2020         87,750,000.00                             -                       
-   148
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No Procuring Entity Date  of 
Submission 
of the PlanAnnual 
Procurement 
Budget (Kes.)Reserved 
Procurement 
Spend (Kes)Percen-
tage 
Reserved 
(>=30%)
87. Kenya Electricity 
Transmission Co. 
Ltd08/07/2020           1,652,319.00                             -                       
-   
88. Centre for 
Mathematics, 
Science and 
Technology 
Education in Africa08/07/2020       281,318,435.00                             -                       
-   
89. Bungoma County 
Government08/12/2020     2,016,261,482.35                             -                       
-   
90. Kenya marine 
Fisheries Research 
Institute13/08/2020       522,533,450.00                             -                       
-   
91. Council of Legal 
Education25/8/2020       113,385,846.00                             -                       
-   
92. Higher Education 
Loans Board           5,889,968.00                      
-   
93. Tharaka University 
College27/8/2020       412,040,587.00                      
-   
94. Kenya Trade 
Network Agency31/08/2020               27,000.00                             -                       
-   
95. Office of the 
Auditor General31/08/2020       791,941,010.00                             -                       
-   
96. Teachers Service 
Commission09/01/2020   13,203,223,637.00                             -                       
-   
97. Lake Victoria Water 
Works 
Development 
Agency10/07/2020       102,424,402.82                             -                       
-   
98. Kenya Dairy Board 18/09/2020       156,491,000.00                             -                       
-   
99. Kenya Rural Roads 
Authority29/09/2020     1,270,841,821.00                             -                       
-   
100. Insurance 
Regulatory 
Authority10/01/2020     1,270,841,821.00                             -                       
-   
101. Kenya National 
Convention Bureau13/10/2020   
102. Nzoia Sugar Co. 28/7/2020   
103. Kenya National 
Bureau of Statistics08/03/2020                          -                               -   149
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No Procuring Entity Date  of 
Submission 
of the PlanAnnual 
Procurement 
Budget (Kes.)Reserved 
Procurement 
Spend (Kes)Percen-
tage 
Reserved 
(>=30%)
104. Kenya Tourism 
Board08/07/2020  1,24,009,383.00                             -   
105. Geothermal 
Development Co.13/08/2020   
106. Tranzoia County 
Government 30/8/2020                          -                               -   
107. Michuki Technical 
Training Institute31/08/2020   
108. Ministry of 
Petroleum & 
Mining31/08/2020     1,021,006,400.00  
109. County 
Government of 
Nyamira31/08/2020   
110. Nyandarua County 
Assembly09/01/2020                          -   40,927,520.00 
111. County 
Government of 
Kilifi09/01/2020     2,360,325,889.00                             -    
112. National 
Environment Trust 
Fund09/01/2020    
113. Bomet University 
College09/07/2020       163,900,060.00                             -    
114. New Partnership for 
Africa's 
Development09/11/2020    
115. Kwale Water and 
Sewerage 
Company Ltd15/09/20    
116. Ministry of Public 
Service & Gender. 
State Department 
of Public Service16/09/2020                          -                               -    
117. County Assembly 
of Kilifi21/09/2020       294,420,133.00   
118. Tourism Finance 
Corporation24/09/2020       191,410,238.00   150
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 ANNEX 2:  
LIST OF PROCURING ENTITIES THAT SUBMITTED 
REPORTS ON CONTRACT AWARDS
No. Categorization of PE’s
Ministries and State Departments
1. Ministry of Energy
2. Ministry of Industry, Trade and Enterprise Development
3. Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife ( Kenya National Convention Bureau)
4. Ministry of Interior and Co-ordination of National Government
5. Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives (State 
Depertment for Livestock)
6. Ministry of East African Community and Regional Development
7. Ministry of Labour and Social Protection (State Depertment for Social 
Protection)
8. Ministry of Lands and Physical Planning
9. Ministry of Devolution and ASALs
10. Ministry of Transport, Infrastructure, Housing, Urban Development and Public 
Works
11. Ministry of ICT, Innovation and Youth Affairs (State Depertment for 
Broadcasting and Telecommunication)
12. Ministry of Public Service and Gender 
13. Ministry of Water, Sanitation and Irrigation
State Corporations and SAGAs
14. Kenya Airports Authority
15. Kenya Railways Corporation
16. Kenya Maritime Authority
17. Kenya National Highway Authority
18. Kenya Ports Authority
19. Kenya Roads Board
20. Kenya Trade Network Agency
21. National Council of Population and Development
22. Central Rift Valley Water Development Works Authority
23. Postal Corporatuon of Kenya
24. Kenya School of Government
25. Kenya Forest Research Institute
26. Huduma Kenya Secretariat
27. National Construction Authority
28. Geothermal Development Company151
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Categorization of PE’s
29. Kenya Electricity Genarating Company
30. Kenya Petroleum Refineries Limited
31. Kenya Pipeline Company Limited
32. National Oil Corporation of Kenya
33. Capital Market Authority
34. Retirement Benefit Authority 
35. National Transport and Safety Authority
36. Kenya Electricial Transmission Company Ltd
37. Nuclear Power and Energy Agency (NUPEA)
38. Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital 
39. Agricultural Development Corporation
40. Agricultural Finance Corpration 
41. Kenya Dairy Board
42. Lake Basin Development Authority
43. Kenya Space Agency
44. Kenya Accreditation Service
45. Insurance Regulatory Authority
46. Consolidated Bank
47. IDB Capital Market 
48. Industrialization and Commercial Development Corporation 
49. Kenya Post Office Savings Bank
50. Kenya Reinsurance Corporation Ltd
51. Kenya Revenue Authority
52. Kenya National Hospital 
53. Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
54. Unclaimed Financial Assets Authority
55. Athi Water Works Development Agency
56. Kenya  Water Institute
57. Thika Water and Sewerage Company Ltd
58. Northern Water Works Development Agency
59. Engineers Board of Kenya
60. Mavoko Water and Sewarage Company
61. Tana and Athi Rivers Development Authority
62. Pest control Products Board
63. Kenya Animal Genetic Resource Centre
64. South Nyanza Sugar Company Limited
65. Kenya Forest Service152
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Categorization of PE’s
66. National Environment Management Authority
67. National Environment Trust Fund
68. Kenya Medical Supplies Authority
69. Kenya School of Government 
70. Kenyatta University Teaching Referral and Research Hospital
71. Kenya National Trading Corporation Ltd
72. Kakamega County Urban Water and Sanitation Corporation
73. Kenya Rural Roads Authority
74. Engineers Board of Kenya
75. National Aids Council
76. Coast Development Authority 
77. Kenya Industrial Research Development Institute
78. Numerical Machining Complex
79. East African Portlands Cement
80. Anti-Counterfeit Authority
81. Kenya Film Communication
82. Kenya Communication Authority 
83. Kenya School of Law
84. National Industrail Training Authority
85. Kenya Medical Training College
86. Higher Education Loans Board
87. Kenya Institute for the Blind
88. Kenya Institute of Cirriculum Development 
89. Kenya Literature Bureau 
90. Centre for Mathematics, Science and Technology  in  Africa
91. Coast Institute of technology
92. Nairobi Centre for International Abitration
93. Teachers Service Commission
94. Kenya National Examination Council
95. Kenya Mass Institute
96. National Hospital Insurance Funds
97. Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority
98. Kenya National Bureau of Stastistic
99. Kenya Vision 2030
100. Agro-chemical and Food Company Limited
101. Chemelil Sugar Company
102. Kenya Veterinary Board153
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Categorization of PE’s
103. Ewaso Nyiro South Development Authority
104. Kenya Wildlife Services
105. Kenya Safaris Lodges and Hotels
106. Kenya Tourism Board
107. The Kenyatta International Convention Centre
108. Tourism Regulatory Authority
109. Micro and Small Enterprises Authority
110. Kenya Copyright Board
111. Center for Mathematics, Science and Technology Education in Africa 
(CEMASTEA)
112. Council of Legal Education
113. Kenya Institute for Public Policy Research and Analysis
114. Kenya Institute of Special Education
115. University of Nairobi Enterprises and Services Ltd
116. National Council for persons with Disabilities
117. Kenya Leather Development Council
118. Kenya Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis Eradication Council (KENTTEC)
119. Kenya Seeds Company 
120 New Kenya Coperatives Creamaries Ltd
121. Nyayo Tea Zones Development Corporations
122. Kenya National Convention Bureau
123. National Museum of Kenya
124. Tourism Finance Corporation
125. Kerio Valley Development Authority
126. Kenya Bureau of Standards
127. Export Processing Zone Authority
128. Communication Authority of Kenya
129. ICT Authority
130. National Crime Research Centre
131. Regional Centre on Groundwater Resource Education, Training and Research
132. Technical and Vocational Education and Training Authority
133. Water Service Regulatory Board
134. Kenya Water Towers Agency
135. Nairobi Water and Sewarage Company 
Constitutional Commissions, Institutions and Independent Offices
136. Lands Commission
137. The Judicial Service Commission154
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Categorization of PE’s
138. Office of the Controller of Budget
139. Office of the Registra of Political Parties 
140. Kenya National Commission for UNESCO
141. Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission
142. Anti-female genital mutilation Board
143. Office of The Auditor General
144. Privatization Commission
145. Commission on Revenue Allocation
146. Office of The President (NGOs Co-Ordination Board)
147. Office of the Deputy President
148. Public Service Commission
149. The Judiciary
150. Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
151. Teachers Service Commission
152. Parliamentary Service  Commission 
Public Universities and University Colleges
153. Chuka University
154. Bomet University 
155. Dedan Kimathi University Of Technology
156. Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology
157. Karatina University
158. Koitaleel Samoei University College
159. Kisii University
160. Kirinyaga University
161. Kibabii Technical University 
162. Kenyatta University
163. Egerton University 
164. The Corporative University of Kenya
165. Masinde Muliro University of science and Technology
166. Murang'a University of Technology
167. Masaai Mara University
168. Meru University of Science and Technology
169. Multimedia University of Kenya
170. Maseno University 
171. Jaramongi Odinga Oginga University 
172. Rongo University
173. Technical University of Mombasa155
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Categorization of PE’s
174. Tharaka University College
175. Taita Taveta University
176. Kaimosi Friends College and University 
177. Tom Mboya University College
178. University of Embu
179. Garisaa University
180. Pwani University
181 Laikipia University
182. University of Nairobi
183. University of Eldoret
184. University of Kabianga
Public Colleges, Polytechnics & Training Institutes
185. Kitale National Polytechnic
186. Koshin Technical Training Institute
187. Meru National Polytechnic
188. Nyandarua Institute of Science and Technology
189. Mitunguu Technical Training Institute
190. Maasai Mara Technical and Vocational College (MMTVC)
191. Friends College Kaimosi
192. Kenya Utalii College
193. Machakos Teachers College 
194. Sigalagala National Polytechnic
195. The Eldoret National Polytechnic
196. The Kisumu National Polytechnic 
197. Wote Technical Training Institute
198. Kasarani Technical and Vocational College
199. Kenya Water Institute
200. Masinga technical & Vocational College
201. Kapcherop Technical & Vocational College
202. weru technical and Vocational College
203. Karumo Technical Training Institute
204. Nkabune Technical Training Institute 
205. Siala Technical Training Institute 
206. Kenya Coast National Polytechnic 
207. Mukurewini technical training Institute
208. Nairobi Technical Training Institute 156
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Categorization of PE’s
NGCDF and NGAAF Committees
210. Embakasi West CDF
211. Kesses CDF
212. National Government CDF Likoni
213. National Government CDF Ruaraka
214. National Government CDF Juja
215. National Government CDF Marakwet East Constituency
216. Langata CDF
217. National Government Affirmative Action Fund
218. National Government Constituencies Development Fund Board
County Governments Executives
219. County Government of Muranga
220. County Government of Elgeyo Marakwet
221. County Government of Lamu
222. County Government of Machakos 
223. County Government of Marsabit 
224. County Government of Mandera
225. County Government of Meru
226. County Government of Nakuru
227. County Government of Nyandarua
228. County Government of Kwale
229 County Government of Taita Taveta
230. County Government of Kiambu
231. County Government of Naiorbi 
232. County Government of Bungoma
233. County Government of Kericho
234. County Government of Kajiado
235. County Government of Kisii
236. County Government of Migori
237. County Government of Busia
238. County Government of Nyamira
239. County Government of Nyeri
240. County Government of Trans Nzoia
241. County Government of Turkana
242. County Government of West Pokot
County  Assemblies
243. County Assembly of Makueni157
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 No. Categorization of PE’s
244. County Assembly of Kilifi
245. County Assembly of Mandera
246. County Assembly of Siaya
247. County Assembly of Garissa
248. County Assembly of Nairobi
249. County Assembly of Nandi
250. County Assembly of Embu
251. County Assembly of Kirinyaga
252. County Assembly of Kisumu
253. County Assembly of Nakuru
254. County Assembly of Nyandarua
255. County Assembly of Wajir
256. County Assembly of Nairobi
257 County Assembly of Kericho
258. County Assembly of Nyeri
259. County Assembly of Kitui
260. County Assembly of Muranga
261. Conuty Assembly of Samburu
262. County Assembly of Bungoma
263. County Assembly of Baringo
Pension Funds for Public Entity
264. Policy Holders Compensation Fund
265. Finance University Fund
266. Women Enterprise Fund
267. Tourism Fund
268. Water Service Trust Fund
269. Kenya Power Pension Fund158
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 159
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 160
PPRA ANUAL REPORT 2020 - 2021 PUBLIC PROCUREMENT
REGULA TORY AUTHORIT Y
Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
Na�onal Bank buil �ing ��th � oor,
Harambee A venue
P.O Box 58535-00200, Nairobi, Kenya
Tel: +254- 2-3244000
E-mail: inf o@ppra.go.ke, 
Website: www.ppra.go.ke

--- Extracted from: AUDITOR-GENERALS-SUMMARY-REPORT-ON-NATIONAL-GOVERNMENT-2022-2023-with-cover.pdf ---
AUDITOR-GENERAL’S SUMMARY REPORT 
ON NATIONAL GOVERNMENT         2022/2023
SUMMARY OF THE 
AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT  
ON NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
2021/2022
Office of the Auditor-General Kenya oagkenyaCONTACTS
3rd Floor, Anniversary Towers, University Way, Nairobi
Phone: +254 020 3214000  Email: info@oagkenya.go.ke  Website: https://www.oagkenya.go.ke/
@OAG_Kenya
AUDITOR-GENERAL’S SUMMARY REPORT 
ON NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
2022/2023
 
   
 
 
SUMMARY  
 
 
OF  
 
 
 
THE AUDITOR -GENERAL ’S REPORT   
 
 
ON  
 
 
 
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
 
2022 /2023 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   Table of Contents                                                                                                            Page        
                                                                                       
      
Table of Contents  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... i 
List of Tables      ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  iii 
List of Figures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  iv 
Foreword  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. v 
Constitutional Mandate of the Auditor -General  ................................ ................................ ...... viii 
Responsibilities of Management and those Charged with Governance ................................ . viii 
Auditor -General’s Responsibility  ................................ ................................ .............................  ix 
Reporting Structure  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. ix 
Audit Opinions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  x 
Resource Requirements for the Office of the Auditor -General  ................................ ................. x 
1.0 Key Audit Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 1 
1.1 Government Budgetary and Expenditure Review  ................................ .........................  1 
1.1.1  Budget Credibility  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 1 
1.1.2  Budget Trend Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 1 
1.1.3  Budget for 2022/2023  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 3 
1.1.4  Additional Funding and Withdrawals Under Article 223 of the Constitution  .................. 5 
1.2 2022/2023 Net Actual Expenditure for the National Government  ................................ . 7 
1.3 Revenue Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 8 
1.3.1  Estimated Receipts Versus Actual Receipts of Ordinary Revenue  ...............................  8 
1.3.2  Comparison of Ordinary Revenue to Expenditure  ................................ ....................... 10 
1.3.3  Actual Revenue as per Audited Revenue Statements  ................................ .................11 
1.4 The National Exchequer Account as at 30 June, 2023  ................................ ................12 
1.5 Management of Publi c Debt  ................................ ................................ ........................ 15 
1.6 Outstanding On -Lent Loans  ................................ ................................ ........................ 19 
1.7 Outstanding Obligations Guaranteed by the Government of Kenya  ............................ 22 
2.0 Pending Bills  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............23 
2.1 Pending Bills - Ministries, Department and  Agencies  ................................ ..................23 
2.2 Pending Bills - Donor Funde d Projects ................................ ................................ ........27 
3.0 Summary of Audit Observations  ................................ ................................ ..................29 
3.1 Overall Summary of Audit Opinions  ................................ ................................ ............ 29 
3.2 Summary of Audit Opinions Excluding Donor Funded Projects and National Funds  ...30 
3.3 Audit of Revenue Statements  ................................ ................................ ..................... 31 
3.4 Audit of Financial Statements for Voted Provisions  ................................ ..................... 33 ii 
 3.5 Main Audit Observations Reported Under MDA s ................................ ........................ 35 
3.6 Audit of Donor Funded Projects  ................................ ................................ ..................45 
3.7 Other Observations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....46 
3.7.1  Inaccuracies in the Financial Statements  ................................ ................................ ....46 
3.7.2  Inadequacies in the Integrated Financial Management Information System  ................47 
3.7.3  Unsupported E xpenditure  ................................ ................................ ........................... 48 
3.7.4  Stalled/Delayed Projects  ................................ ................................ ............................. 53 
3.8 Land Without Ownership Documents  ................................ ................................ ..........56 
3.9 Other Audit Matters  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....57 
3.9.1  Unresolved Prior Year Audit Issues  ................................ ................................ ............ 57 
4.0 Compliance and Governance Issues  ................................ ................................ ..........58 
5.0 The Equalisation Fund  ................................ ................................ ................................ 60 
APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 62 
 
 
                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 iii 
 List of Tables                                                Page 
 
Table 1: Analysis of Budget Requirement by OAG versus Allocation  ................................ ... xi 
Table 2: National Government Budget Versus Allocation to OAG  ................................ ........ xii 
Table 3: Budget Trend Analysis  ................................ ........................................................  2 
Table 4: Estimated Gross Expenditure  ................................ ................................ ............... 3 
Table 5: Initial vs Final Approved Budget  ................................ ................................ ........... 5 
Table 6: Withdrawals Under Article 223 of the Constitution in 2022 -2023 ..............................  5 
Table 7: Actual Expenditure - National Government  ................................ ............................  7 
Table 8: Extent of Under -Expenditure – National Government MDAs  ................................ .... 7 
Table 9: Under -Expenditure Trend for National Government MDAs  ................................ ...... 8 
Table 10: Estimated Revenue Versus Actual Receipts  ........................................................  9 
Table 11: Estimated Revenue Versus Estimated Expenditure  ................................ ............ 10 
Table 12: Actual Revenue Versus Actual G ross Expenditure  ................................ ............. 10 
Table 13: Comparison of Actual Receipts with the Prior Year Receipts  ...............................  11 
Table 14: Reconciliation of Ordinary Revenue  ................................ ................................ .. 11 
Table 15: Shortfall in Revenue Receipts  ................................ ................................ .......... 12 
Table 16: Exchequer Issues in 2022/2023  ................................ ................................ ........ 13 
Table 17: Underfunding of Approved Expenditure  ................................ .............................  15 
Table 18: Growth of Public Debt in the Last Five Years  .....................................................  15 
Table 19: Public Debt Expenditure  ................................ ..................................................  16 
Table 20: Comparison of Public Debt Expenditure to Ordinary Reve nue .............................  17 
Table 21: Consolidated Fund Services Expenditure  ................................ ..........................  18 
Table 22: Institutions which did not Confirm Loan Balances  ................................ ............... 20 
Table 23: Non -Performing Loans Issued to Local Entities  ..................................................  20 
Table 24: Non -Performing Investments  ................................ ................................ ............ 22 
Table 25: Outstanding Obligations Guaranteed by GOK  ....................................................  23 
Table 26:  Pending Bills for the Last Five Years  ................................ ................................ . 24 
Table 27: Ministries, Department and Agencies (MDAs) Disclosed Bills 2022/2023  .............. 25 
Table 28: Contingent Liabilities for MDAs  ................................ ................................ ......... 28 
Table 29: Contingent Liabilities for Donor Funded Projects  ................................................  28 
Table 30: Audit Opinions on National Government Entities Excluding National Funds  .......... 29 iv 
 Table 31: Audit Opinions Trend on Government Entities  ....................................................  29 
Table 32: Audit Opinions on Financial Statements in the Last Five Years  ............................  30 
Table 33:  Summary of Audit Opinions on Revenue Statements  ................................ ......... 31 
Table 34: Revenue Statements whose Opinion was Unmodified  ................................ ........ 32 
Table 35: Revenue Statements whose Opinion was Qualified  ................................ ............ 32 
Table  36: Summary of  Audit  Opinions  on  Combined  Recurrent  and  Development    
Expenditure  ................................ ................................ ................................  ..34 
Table 37: Unsupported Expenditure - MDAs  ................................ ................................ ..... 49 
Table 38: Unsupported Expenditure - Donor Funded Projects  ................................ ............ 49 
Table 39: Stalled/Delayed Projects for MDAs  ................................ ................................ ... 53 
Table 40: Land Without Ownership Documents  ................................ ................................  56 
Table 41: MDAs Affected by One -Third of Basic Salary Rule  ................................ ............. 58 
Table 42: Total Accumulated Entitlement – Equalisation Fund  ................................ ........... 61 
 
List of Figure s                                                                                                                        Page  
 
Figure 1: OAG Budget Requirement Versus Budget Allocation  ................................ ............ xi 
Figure 2: National Government Budget Versus Allocation to OAG  ................................ ....... xii 
Figure 3: Budget Trend Analysis  ................................ .......................................................  2 
Figure 4: Estimated gross  Expenditure  ................................ ................................ .............. 4 
Figure 5: Estimated Receipts Versus Actual Receipts of Ordinary Revenue  ..........................  9 
Figure 6: Growth of Public Debt in the last Five Years  .......................................................  16 
Figure 7: Public Debt Expenditure for the Last Five Years  .................................................  17 
Figure 8: Pending Bills Trend in the Last Five (5) Years  ....................................................  24 
Figure 9: Audit Opinions on Financial Statements for the last Five Financial Years  .............. 31 
Figure 10: Audit Opinions on Financial Statements  ................................ ...........................  34 v 
 Foreword  
 
This report  is a summary of cross -cutting audit findings  reported in the audit reports of 
Ministries, Departments and Agencies including their respective Donor Funded Projects 
for the year ended 30 June, 2023. The detailed report for the National Governme nt for 
the year ended 30 June, 202 3 is contained in the Consolidated Audit Report, popularly 
referred to as the Blue Book  and which have  already been submitted to Parliament .  
 
The Auditor- General is mandated by the Constitution of Kenya, under Article 229, to audit 
and report on the use of public resources by all entities funded from public funds. These 
entities include the National Government, County Governments, the Judiciary, 
Parliament, Statutory Bodies/State Corporations, Commissions, Independen t Offices, 
Public Debt, Political Parties funded from public funds, other government agencies and 
any other entity funded from public funds. In addition, Article 229(6) requires the Auditor -
General to confirm whether or not public resources have been appli ed lawfully and in an 
effective way. The mandate of the Auditor -General is further expounded by the Public 
Audit Act, 2015.  
 
Article 229 (7) of the Constitution requires the Auditor -General to audit and submit reports 
to Parliament or the relevant County Assembly within six (6) months after the end of the 
financial year. However, Section 81(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012, 
reduces the timelines for audit and reporting to three (3) months by giving entities leeway 
up to the end of September to  prepare and submit financial statements for audit. This 
reduces the duration for audit and reporting from six (6) months as mandated by the 
Constitution to three (3) months.   This has been adversely affecting the timelines for 
reporting, leading to del ays and affecting the efficiency and effectiveness for oversight by 
Parliament and the County Assemblies.  
 
Further, as previously reported, an effective mechanism for follow up on implementation 
of audit recommendations is lacking and as such most audit queries recur in subsequent 
years due to lack of decisive action. Section 204(1)(g) of the Public Finance Man agement 
Act, 2012 provides that the Cabinet Secretary for matters relating to finance may apply 
sanctions to a national government entity that fails to address issues raised by the 
Auditor -General, to the satisfaction of the Auditor -General.  
 
However, des pite numerous reports indicating lack of accountability and documents to 
support the legality and effectiveness in the use of public resources, failure to apply the 
requisite sanctions and consequences has resulted to some Accounting Officers not 
adequatel y accounting for the management and use of public resources with impunity. 
Lack of action and sanctions has also led to fiscal indiscipline including misallocations, 
wastage of resources, lack of value for money in implementation of projects and loss of 
public funds, thereby impacting negatively on development programmes. This in turn 
threatens economic growth and sustainability of quality service delivery to citizens. There 
are instances where some Accounting Officers are in breach of Section 62 of the Pub lic 
Audit Act, 2015 by failing to adequately prepare for audit which is exhibited by numerous 
inaccuracies in financial statements presented for audit, lack of requisite supporting vi 
 documents, several revisions of financial statements and, in some cases, re luctance to 
cooperate with the auditors during the audit process.  
 
The Office of the Auditor -General has been continuously improving on the effectiveness 
and quality of the audit process to ensure that the results of audit and the 
recommendations thereof are credible, relevant, reliable and value adding. This is geared 
towards influencing improved decision making and positive impact on the lives and 
livelihoods of citizens and other stakeholders. Provision of quality and effective audit 
services and confir mation of the lawfulness and effectiveness in programme 
implementation requires comprehensive scrutiny and evaluation of supporting 
documents. Most critical is the physical confirmation of the existence and utilization of 
projects or programmes implemented  throughout the country. To achieve this requires 
an independent and well -resourced audit Office with guaranteed adequate funding to 
enable efficient, effective and timely execution of the oversight as well as retention of 
optimal staffing levels to ensure  continuous, quality and sustainable audit operations.  
 
The Office continues to seek financial independence and support from Parliament and 
the Executive through The National Treasury for enhancement of resources to enable us 
build technical capacity, exp and our presence in the counties, widen the scope and 
comprehensiveness of audit and motivate staff. I continue to devolve my services closer 
to the people through establishment of Regional Offices and construction of office 
premises to accommodate our staff in order to address the audit needs at the devolved 
level. During the year under review, I established the North Coast Regional Office in Kilifi 
and the South Rift Regional Office in Kericho. I have so far constructed Regional Offices 
in Ga rissa, Kakamega and Eldoret, while construction works in Embu is almost complete.  
Plans for construction of a Regional Office in Mombasa and our Headquarters in Nairobi, 
which are currently at the design stage, have been delayed by lack of adequate funding. 
However, the Office continues to make appeals to Parliament and The National Treasury 
for adequate funds to enable us perform our functions and achieve our mandate in 
enhancing accountability across government, both at the national and county levels,  and 
in all other entities funded from public funds.  
 
The audit scope has been expanding over the years due to the expansion of government 
programs to ensure sustainable development and delivery of continuous and quality 
services to the citizens.  This has led to growth in the national budget and formation of  
additional entities that I am required to audit and report on. All the over nine thousand 
(9,000) Public Secondary Schools were from 30 June, 2022 required to prepare and 
submit financial statements to the Auditor -General for audit and quite a number have  
complied. In addition, I am required to audit and report on financial statements for all the 
three hundred and fifty -eight (358) Level 4 hospitals and fourteen (14) Level 5 hospitals 
separately. In the current financial year, I am also required to audit a  total of thirty- nine 
(39) Teachers’ Training Colleges, two hundred and eighty -seven (287) Technical and 
Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Institutions and the number could increase as 
we are currently undertaking an evaluation exercise with the Sta te Department for 
Technical, Vocational Education and Training to identify all institutions funded by the ix 
 and risk management, and ensu ring the adequacy and effectiveness of the control 
environment.  
 
Auditor -General’s Responsibility  
 
My responsibility is to conduct an audit of the  financial statements in accordance with the 
International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs), and to issue an auditor’s 
report. The audit report includes my opinion as provided by Section 48 of the Public Audit 
Act, 2015, and the report is s ubmitted to Parliament in compliance with Article 229(7) of 
the Constitution.  
 
In addition, Article 229(6) of the Constitution requires me to express a conclusion on 
whether or not, in all material respects, the activities, financial transactions and 
information reflected in the financial statements are in compliance with the law and other 
authorities that govern them, and that public resources are applied in an effective way. I 
also consider the entities’ control environment in order to give an assurance o n the 
effectiveness of internal controls, risk management and governance processes and 
systems, in accordance with the provisions of Section 7(1)(a) of the Public Audit                          
Act, 2015.  
 
I am independent  in accordance with Article 249(2) of the Constitution of Kenya and  
ISSAI 130 on the Code of Ethics. I have fulfilled other ethical responsibilities i n 
accordance with the ISSAI and in accordance with other ethical requirements applicable 
to performing audits of public entities in the Republic of Kenya.  
 
Reporting Structure  
 
The reporting structure of my report address the reporting requirements of Article 229(6) 
of the Constitution of Kenya, which requires that an audit report shall confirm whether or 
not public resources have been applied lawfully and in an effective way. Section 7(1) (a) 
of the Public Audit Act, 2015 also requires that I provide a ssurance on the effectiveness 
of internal controls, risk management and overall governance.  
 
In addition, the International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs), require 
the incorporation of Key Audit Matters in the report on the financial stat ements, which are 
those matters that I determine in my professional judgment, are of most significance in 
the audit of the financial statements as a whole, for the year under review.  
 
In order to address these requirements, my audit reports contain the fo llowing:  
 
i. Report on Financial Statements , in which I give an audit opinion on whether the 
financial statements present fairly, in all material respects , the financial position 
and performance of the entity.  
 
ii. Report on Lawfulness and Effectiveness in Use of Public Resources , in which 
I give a conclusion on whether or not public resources have been applied lawfully 
and in an effective way.  
 x 
 iii. Report on Effectiveness of Internal Controls, Risk Management and 
Governance , in which I give a conclusion on whether internal controls, risk 
management and overall governance were effective.  
 
iv. Report on Other Legal and Regulatory Requirements  is included where 
applicable, especially for the entities that are registered under the Companies Act, 
2015 and any other enabling legislation or authorities that require such disclosure.  
 
Audit Opinions 
 
I have expressed different types of audit opinions based on the following criteria:  
 
i. Unmodified Opinion  
  
The books of accounts and underlying records agree with the financial statements and 
no material misstatements were found. The financial statements present fairly, in all 
material respects, the operations of the entity. The financial statements with Unmodi fied 
Opinion are listed in Appendix A . 
  
ii. Qualified Opinion  
 
 
Financial transactions were recorded and are to a large extent in agreement with the 
underlying records, except for cases where I noted material misstatements or omissions 
in the financial statements. The issues though material, are not widespread or persi stent. 
The financial statements with Qualified Opinion are listed in Appendix B . 
 
iii. Adverse Opinion  
 
 
The financial statements exhibit significant misstatements with the underlying accounting 
records. There exists significant disagreement(s) between the financial statements and 
the underlying books of accounts and/or standards. These problems are widesprea d, 
persistent and require considerable interventions by the management to rectify. The 
financial statements with Adverse Opinion are listed in Appendix C . 
   
iv. Disclaimer of Opinion  
 
The financial statements exhibit serious and significant misstatements that  may arise 
from inadequate information, limitation of scope, inadequacy or lack of proper records 
such that I was not able to form an opinion on the financial operations.  The financial 
statements with Disclaimer of Opinion are listed in Appendix D . 
Resource Requirements for the Office of the Auditor -General     
 
Article 229 (7) of the Constitution requires the Auditor -General to audit and submit reports 
to Parliament or the relevant County Assembly within six (6) months after the end of the 
financia l year. However, Section 81(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012, xi 
 reduces the timeline to three (3) months by giving entities leeway up to the end of 
September to prepare and submit financial statements for audit.   
  
Despite the expanded audit scope , inadequate funding and delayed disbursements affect 
the audit cycle, which is different from the budget execution cycle of the Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies (MDAs). This also reduces the scope of audit in terms of 
coverage and comprehensiven ess. Table 1 and Figure 1  illustrate the budget 
requirements by the Office of the Auditor -General versus the allocated amounts  over the 
last five (5) years.  
 
Table 1: Analysis of Budget Requirement by OAG versus Allocation  
 
 
 
Year  Requirement  
(Kshs. 
Billions)  Budget Allocation  
(Kshs. Billions)  Budget 
Shortfall  
(Kshs. 
Billions)  Actual 
Expenditure  
(Kshs. 
Billions)  OAG Budget 
Absorption  
% 
2018/2019  9.206  5.968  3.238  5.783  97 
2019/2020  8.880 5.505  3.375  5.425  99 
2020/2021  8.900 5.525  3.375  5.348  96 
2021/2022  8.333  6.083  2.250 5.613  92 
2022/2023  8.700 6.532  2.168    6.058  93 
 
Figure 1: OAG Budget Requirement Versus Budget Allocation  
 
 
  
9.2068.88 8.9
8.3338.7
5.968
5.505 5.5256.0836.532
012345678910
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Amount in (Billions of Kshs.)
Financial Year
Requirement
 Budget Allocationxii 
 Table 2 and Figure 2  reflect  the National Government budget against the allocation to the 
Office of the Auditor -General  in the last five years . 
Table 2: National Government Budget Versus Allocation to OAG  
 
 
Financial Year  National Budget  
 (Kshs. in Trillions)  OAG Budget  
Allocation  
(Kshs. in Billions)  % of  
Allocation to  National  
Budget  
2018/2019  3.106  5.968  0.19%  
2019/2020  3.163  5.505  0.17%  
2020/2021  3.380  5.525  0.16%  
2021/2022  3.832  6.083  0.16%  
2022/2023  4.069 6.532  0.16%  
 
Figure 2: National Government Budget Versus Allocation to OAG  
 
 
The Office of the Auditor -General can deliver effectively  on its mandate as enshrined in 
the Constitution and in the Public Audit Act, 2015 if it is adequately resourced, thus  
enhancing accountability in the public sector.   
 
The key cross -cutting audit findings noted during the audit of the financial statements for 
the year ended 30 June, 2023 are highlighted in the ensuing pages.  
 
3.106
Trillion3.163
Trillion3.380
Trillion3.832
Trillion4.069
Trillion
5.968
Billion5.505
Billion5.525
Billion6.083
Billion6.532
Billion
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Amount In (Kshs .)
Financial Year
National Budget
 OAG Budget Allocation1 
 1.0  Key Audit Findings    
The sections below highlight key audit findings made during the audit of the financial 
statements for the National Government for the year ended 30 June, 202 3.  
  
1.1 Government Budgetary and Expenditure Review  
  
1.1.1   Budget Credibility  
 
Budget credibility refers to the ability of Government (s) to meet their expenditure and 
revenue targets accurately and consistently  in a given financial year . Any deviations from 
the approved budget estimates interfere with the credibility of the budget. A credible 
budget is one that is executed according to the plan approved by the legislature at 
aggregate and detailed allocations.  
 
Budget credibility is about upholding government commitments and understanding why 
governments deviate from these commitments. The credibility of government budgets is 
a key driver of effective service delivery and public trust in government systems. When 
budgets are not implemented as planned, spending priorities can shift, deficits may 
exceed projections, and critical services may be compromised. Budget credibility risks 
can occur at any stage of the budget process at the whole -of-government level and dur ing 
the execution of the budget by entities or in specific programs. 
 
I reviewed the Government budget for the financial year 2022/2023 for credibility by 
considering several  factors that included a ssessing deviations in expenditure , both over 
and unde r-expenditure;  deviations in revenue , and d eviations in spending composition . 
Review of the Government’s budget and expenditures for the year 2022/2023 revealed 
the following:  
 
 
1.1.2  Budget Trend Analysis   
 
The estimated gross expenditure increased over the last five years from 
Kshs. 3,106,405,817,692 in the year 201 8/2019 to Kshs. 4,068,763,311,037 in the year 
2022/2023. This  represent ed an increase of Kshs. 962,357,493,345 or approximately 31% 
over the five -year period.  Similarly, the actual gross expenditure increased from 
Kshs. 2,911,690,013,343 in the year 201 8/2019 to Kshs .3,614,183,369,857  in the year 
2022/2023 representing an increase of Ks hs.702,493,356,514  or approximately 24% over 
the period. This indicates that the increase in estimated expenditure was higher by 7% 
compared to the increase in actual expenditure. The scope of my audit has also increased 
considerably over the last five years.  Table 3 and Figure 3 below depicts the expenditure 
trend  for the last five years :  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 Table 3: Budget Trend Analysis  
  
  
 
Year  Estimated Gross  
Expenditure  Actual Gross  
Expenditure  Under - 
Expenditure  Percentage 
of Under - 
Expenditure  
(Kshs. ) (Kshs. ) (Kshs. ) %  
2018/2019  3,106,405,817,692  2,911,690,013,343  194,715,804,349  6% 
2019/2020  3,162,976,512,141  2,908,327,356,465  254,649,155,676  8% 
2020/2021  3,379,902,931,417  3,211,490,363,999  168,412,567,419  5% 
2021/2022  3,832,087,729,957  3,473,135,105,212  358,952,624,745  9% 
2022/2023  4,068,763,311,037  3,614,183,369,857  454,579,941,180  11% 
 
Figure 3: Budget Trend Analysis  
 
 
 
 
The above analysis indicates that the under-expenditure  of the budget has been 
averag ing 7.8% of the estimated gross  expenditure in the last five (5) years . The                
under -expenditure  of the budget implies that ;  
 
i Some development programmes are not implemented as planned  and some 
services  are not deliver ed.  
 
ii The estimated expenditure may not be comprehensively backed by co mplete  or 
accurate data, resulting to over estimation.   
 
iii The under- expenditure is also attributed to under -collection of revenue below the 
set targets leading to  delays in Exchequer releases .  
 
3.11 3.163.383.834.07
2.91 2.913.213.473.61
00.511.522.533.544.5
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Amount in (Trillions (Kshs.)
Financial Year
Estimated Gross  Expenditure Actual Gross Expenditure
Linear (Estimated Gross  Expenditure) Linear (Actual Gross Expenditure)3 
 iv Previous budget absorption rates are not used to project future expenditure s. 
 
1.1.3  Budget for 202 2/2023  
 
In the financial year 2022 /2023, the Net Approved Expenditure was 
Kshs. 3,620,152,378,939  while approved Appropriations -In-Aid (AIA) was 
Kshs. 448,610,932,098 resulting in Approved Estimated Gross Expenditure of 
Kshs. 4,068,763,311,037 as detailed in T able 4 below:  
 
Table 4: Estimated  Gross Expenditure  
 
 
 
 
Description   
Approved Net  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)   
 
A-I-A 
(Kshs.)   
Estimated Gross  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Percentage  
to Total  
Expenditure  
Recurrent Votes  1,268,812,430,857   239,422,853,182  1,508,235,284,039  37% 
Development  Votes  373,998,242,001   209,188,078,916   583,186,320,917  14% 
Consolidated Fund 
Services  1,577,741,706,081   -     1,577,741,706,081  39% 
Sub-Total for  National  
Government  3,220,552,378,939   448,610,932,098  3,669,163,311,037  90% 
County  Governments  399,600,000,000   -     399,600,000,000  10% 
Total Expenditure  3,620,152,378,939   448,610,932,098  4,068,763,311,037  100%  
 
As indicated in Table 4 above , 37% of the estimated gross  expenditure was budgeted for 
recurrent expenditure and 14% for development expenditure. Consolidated Fund 
Services, including repayments of Public Debt accounted for 39%, while County 
Governments estimated expenditure accounted for  10% of the estima ted gross  
expenditure  as illustrated in Figure 4 below :  
 4 
 Figure 4: Estimated Gross Expenditure  
 
 
 
 
   
During the year under review, development expenditure was allocated only 14% of the 
total budget  contrary to provisions of Section 15(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management 
Act, 2012 which requires that, over the medium term , a minimum of thirty percent (30%) 
of the National and County Governments budget s shall be allocated to development 
expenditure.  
 
The Count y Governments budgeted amount of Kshs. 399,600,000,000 comprised of 
Kshs.370,000,000,000 allocation for financial year 2022/2023 and Kshs.29,600,000,000 
arrears from 2021/2022 . However , the allocation of Kshs.370,000,000,000 for the year 
2022/2023 was based on the approved audited revenue accounts for the year 2017 /2018, 
which was the latest approved audited revenue accounts by the National Assembly as 
indicated in the Division of Revenue Act, 202 2. However, as at the time  of the approval of 
the budget for 202 2/2023 in June 202 2, the Auditor -General had submitted the audit 
reports for the subsequent three financial years including 2020/2021  financial year . 
 
The County Governments’ expenditure  has been reported separately by each of the           
forty-seven (47) County Governments, and audit reports have been issued for the 
respective County Executives and County Assemblies.  
 
Further, the original estimated gross  expenditure  for the National                                                
Government  of Kshs. 3,691,069,563,548  was reduced  by Kshs. 21,906,252,510  to 
Kshs. 3,669,163,311,038  through Supplementary budgets as detailed in Table 5 below:  
 
Recurrent Votes
37%Development Votes
14%Consolidated Fund 
Services
39%
County 
Governments
10%5 
 Table 5: Initial  vs Final Approved Budget  
 
 
   
Final Approved 
Budget  
(Kshs.)  Supplementary  
 1 
(March 2023 ) 
(Kshs.)  Supplementary   
2 
(June 2023)  
(Kshs.)   
 
Original Budget  
(Kshs.)   
 
Difference  
(Kshs.)  
Recurrent  
(Including 
CFS) 3,085,976,990,121  
 75,946,351,613  34,315,859,899  2,975,714,778,609  110,262,211,51 ) 
Development  583,186,320,917  
 (97,190,537,771 ) (34,977,926,251 ) 715,354,784,939  (132,168,464,022 ) 
Total  3,669,163,311,038    3,691,069,563,548  
 (21,906,252,510 ) 
 
The approved final budget for a specific  financial year is only available after the 
supplementary budgets are passed , which are sometimes approved toward s the end of 
the financial year.  
 
 
1.1.4  Additional Funding and Withdrawals Under Article 223 of the Constitution   
 
During the year under audit , additional funding to Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
(MDAs) amounted to Kshs.217,371,983,475 (as detailed in Appendix  E) out of which an 
amount of Kshs. 147,393,843,212 representing 67.8% was withdrawn by various MDAs 
under Article 223 of the Const itution before seeking for the approval of the National 
Assembly  as analyzed in Table 6 below : 
Table  6: Withdrawals Under Article 223 of the Constitution in 2022 -2023  
Vote  MDA   
Purpose  Amount  
(Kshs.)  
1194 State Department for Petroleum  Oil market price stabilization  42,736,088,490  
1066  State Department for Early  
Learning and Basic  Education  Capitation for Junior 
Secondary Schools, Kenya 
Secondary Quality 
Improvement Project and 
Kenya Primary Education 
Equity in Learning Project  25,624,255,888  
1091  State Department for  Roads  Settlement of pending bills for 
ongoing projects  15,350,000,000  
1173  State Department for Cooperatives  Financial Inclusion Fund, set 
up costs for MSMEs and 
operational costs  12,580,000,000  
1071  The National Treasury  Subscription and equity 
participation in Eastern and 
Southern Africa Trade & 
Development Bank, call capital 
for Afreexim Bank and 
purchase of shares for Telkom 
Kenya  12,308,739,612  
1169  State Department for Crop  
Development  Maize flour and fertilizer 
subsidy programmes and 
settlement of Nzoia Sugar 
Company famers dues  11,993,923,200  
1011  The Executive Office of the President  Settlement of pending bills and 
operation and maintenance 
costs  9,580,536,270  6 
 Vote  MDA   
Purpose  Amount  
(Kshs.)  
1109  State Department for  Water and 
Sanitation  Water harvesting and  
irrigation, pending  certificates 
for Thwake Dam and Coastal 
Region Water Security and 
Resilience project  6,817,240,160  
1021  State Department for Interior and  
Citizen Services  Security projects, medical and 
group insurance for the 
National Police Service   5,872,368,879  
1081  Ministry of Health  Procurement of priority medical 
equipment  1,246,632,750  
1052  Ministry of Foreign Affairs  UN Peace Building Fund,  
operations and  maintenance 
costs  840,000,000  
2091  Teachers Service Commission  Recruitment of Junior 
Secondary Schools teachers   840,000,000  
1108  State Department for  Environment  
and Climate Change  Forest Management & water 
towers conservation  430,000,000  
1332  State Department for Forestry   Forest Management and 
Water Towers Conservation  350,000,000  
1152  Ministry of Energy  Operations and maintenance  200,000,000  
1065  State Department for University 
Education  and Research  Enhancement of quality and 
relevance in higher education, 
science and technology 
(HEST)  138,600,000  
2071  Public Service Commission  Ex-gratia payment to the 
Commissioners and 
operations costs  131,500,000  
1054  State Department for Diaspora Affairs  Evacuation of Kenyans from  
Sudan  119,000,000  
1094  State Department for Housing and  
Urban Development  Construction of Mausoleum for 
the late President Mwai Kibaki  112,000,000  
1203  State Department for Wildlife  Wildfires  in Aberdare and Mt.  
Kenya National Park  65,000,000  
1212  State Department for Gender  and 
Affirmative Action   Women Empowerment for 
Gender Equality project  46,972,322  
1072  State Department for Economic 
Planning  Making every woman and girl 
count project  10,985,641  
 Total   147,393,843,212  
 
 
Out of the total expenditure of Kshs.147,393,843,212  incurred under Article 223 , an 
amount of Kshs. 137,197,258,581  was subsequently approved by the National Assembly . 
However, the remaining balance of  Kshs.10,196,584,631 comprising of amounts of 
Kshs.4,000,000,000 and Kshs.6,1 96,584,631  incurred on maize flour subsidy programme 
and acquisition of Telkom (K) shares by the State Department for Crop Development and 
The National Treasury respectively , was not approved  or appropriated  as required by 
Article 223(4) of the Constitution . However, t here is no guideline in place on how  
unapproved withdrawals from the Consolidated Fund under Article 223 should be dealt 
with. The Public Financ e Management Act, 2012  should therefore , be amended to provide 
guidelines on the next cause of action  where expenditure  incurred under Article 223  is not 
approved by the National Assembly . 
 7 
  
1.2  2022 /2023 Net Actua l Expenditure for the National Government  
   
  
1.2.1  The National Government financial statements for the financial                                              
year 2022/2023 indicate total actual expenditure of Kshs .3,214,583,369,857                                       
which  comprise  Kshs .1,408,086,569,092  or 44% for Recurrent Votes,                                         
Kshs .454,533,093,672  or 14% for Development Votes and Kshs .1,351,963,707,093  or 
42% for Consolidated Fund Services respectively , as shown in Table 7 below:  
 
Table 7: Actual Expenditure - National Government  
 
 
Description  2022/2023 Actual  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  % of 
Total Expenditure  
Recurrent Votes   1,408,086,569,092  44% 
Development Votes  454,533,093,672  14% 
Consolidated Fund Services    1,351,963,707,093  42% 
Total   3,214,583,369,857  100%  
  
1.2.2  Comparison of the estimated gross  expenditure of Kshs .3,669,163,311,037 with 
the actual expenditure of Kshs .3,214,583,369,857  results in a gross under -expenditure of 
Kshs .454,579,941,180  or 12% . The under -expenditure of Kshs .454,579,941,180 
comprised under -expenditure of Kshs .100,148,714,947  under Recurrent Votes,                                  
Kshs .128,653,227,245  under Development Votes and Kshs .225,777,998,988  for 
Consolidated Fund Services as shown in Table 8 below:  
 
 
 
Table 8: Extent of Under -Expenditure – National Government  MDAs  
   
 
   
Description  Estimated Gross  
Expenditure  
2022/2023  
(Kshs.)  % of  Estimated 
gross  
Expenditure  Actual  
Expenditure  
2022/2023  
(Kshs.)   
%  
of Actual  
Expenditure  Under  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Under  
Expenditure  
% 
Recurrent 
Votes   
1,508,235,284,039  41%   1,408,086,569,092  44% (100,148,714,947 ) 7% 
Development 
Votes   583,186,320,917  16% 454,533,093,672  14% (128,653,227,245 ) 22% 
Consolidated 
Fund 
Services   1,577,741,706,081  43% 1,351,963,707,093  42% (225,777,998,988 ) 14% 
Total  3,669,163,311,037  100%  3,214,583,369,857  100%  (454,579,941,180 ) 12% 
1.2.3  The under -expenditure of Kshs .100,148,714,947  and Kshs .128,653,227,245 under 
the Recurrent and Development Votes , respectively was mainly attributed to lack of 
adequate Exchequer issues . This was as a result of low revenue collections to finance all 
the budget requests by Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs)  and delayed 
disbursement of donor funds , which hampe red implementation of various programmes 
that had been budgeted for.  Table 9 below depicts the under -expenditure trend for the last 
five years:  
  8 
  
Table 9 : Under -Expenditure Trend for National Government MDAs  
 
Year  Estimated Gross  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Actual  
Expenditure  
 (Kshs.)  Under  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Under  
Expenditure  
% 
2018/2019  2,729,924,433,495  2,569,134,104,494  (160,790,329,001)  6% 
2019/2020  2,815,088,705,839  2,592,356,535,297  (222,732,170,541)  8% 
2020/2021  2,997,300,191,733  2,831,978,180,561  (165,322,011,173)  6% 
2021/2022  3,462,087,729,957  3,132,735,105,212  (329,352,624,745)  10% 
2022/2023  3,669,163,311,037  3,214,583,369,857  (454,579,941,180)  12% 
 
1.2.4  Low allocation of the development budget affect ed the rate of development and 
sustainability of services  in the country . The under -expenditure  of the recurrent budget  
implies that  citizens were not provided with all  requisite services which had been budgeted 
for. It may also imply that budgeting for expenditure may not be taking into consideration 
revenue collection or cashflows  as informed by prior years  actual collections and trends 
in cashflows  thereby leading to excess budgets not likely to be absorbed by the entities .  
 
 
1.3 Revenue Analysis     
  
1.3.1  Estimated Receipts Versus Actual Receipts of Ordinary Revenue   
  
The estimated receipts from tax and non -tax receipts (ordinary revenue) has increased 
over the last five years from Kshs. 1,592,056,746,143 in the year 201 8/2019 to              
Kshs. 2,158,627,298,438 in the year  2022/2023. This is an increase                                                  
in estimated revenue of Kshs. 566,570,552,295 or approximately 36%. Similarly, the actual 
receipts from tax and non -tax receipts increased over the same period from 
Kshs .1,509,057,905,396 in the year 201 8/2019 to Kshs. 2,059,281,671,520 in the year 
2022/2023 representing an increase of Kshs. 550,223,766,124 or approximately 36% as 
tabulated in Table 10 below:  
  9 
  
Table 10: Estimated  Revenue Versus Actual Receipts  
 
 
 
Year  Budgeted Ordinary  
Revenue  
(Tax and Non-Tax 
Receipts)  
(Kshs.)  Actual Ordinary  
Revenue  
(Tax and Non-Tax 
Receipts)  
(Kshs.)  Revenue  
Surplus / 
(Shortfall ) 
(Kshs.)   
Percentage of  
Surplus/ (Shortfall ) 
2018/2019  1,592,056,746,143  1,509,057,905,396  (82,998,840,747 )  (5.2% )  
2019/2020  1,669,701,355,816  1,618,797,777,894  (50,903,577,922 )  (3%)  
2020/2021  1,601,597,982,154  1,601,016,386,868  (581,595,286 ) (0.04% ) 
2021/2022  1,891,602,330,060  1,940,971,132,408  101,497,970,074  5.5%  
2022/2023  2,158,627,298,438  2,059,281,671,520  99,345,626,918  4.6%  
 
  
 
Figure 5  below depicts th e revenue trend for the last five years.  
 
Figure 5: Estimated Receipts Versus Actual Receipts of Ordinary Revenue  
 
 
00.511.522.5
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Receipts vs Actuals  in ( Trillions Kshs.)
Budgeted Ordinary Revenue
 Actual Ordinary Revenue
Budgeted Ordinary revenue Actual Ordinary Revenue10 
 To enhance the quality and accuracy of macro -economic and fiscal forecasting, there is 
need to ensure greater coordination between The National Treasury  and other 
stakeholders contributing critical information and economic data for forecasting, 
especially the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics  (KNBS). This will ensure more realistic 
and effective forecasts of revenue and cash flow  trends .  
 
1.3.2  Comparison of Ordinary Revenue to Expenditure  
  
 
The proportion of projected ordinary revenue against the estimated gross expenditure 
fluctuated between 47% and 5 3% in the period 201 8/2019 to 20 22/2023. Similarly, the 
proportion of actual ordinary revenue against the actual gross expenditure fluctuated 
between 50% and 57% during the same period as tabulated in Table  11 and Table 1 2 
below:  
 
 
 
Table 11: Estimated Revenue Versus Estimated Expenditure  
 
 
 
 
 
Year  Estimated Ordinary  
Revenue (Tax and 
Non-Tax Receipts) 
(Kshs.)  Estimated Gross  
Expenditure 
(Kshs.)  Percentage  of Estimated  
Ordinary Revenue to  
Estimated gross  
Expenditure  
2018/2019  1,592,056,746,143  3,106,405,817,692  51%  
2019/2020  1,669,701,355,816  3,162,976,512,141  53%  
2020/2021  1,601,597,982,154  3,379,902,931,417  47% 
2021/2022  1,891,602,330,060  3,832,087,729,957  48% 
2022/2023  2,158,627,298,438  4,068,763,311,037  53% 
 
Table 12: Actual Revenue Versus Actual Gross Expenditure  
 
 
Year  Actual Ordinary 
Revenue/  
(Tax and Non-Tax 
Receipts)  
(Kshs.)  Actual Gross  
Expenditure 
(Kshs.)  Percentage  of Actual  
Ordinary Revenue to  
Actual Gross  
Expenditure  
2018/2019  1,509,057,905,396  2,911,690,013,343  52%  
2019/2020  1,618,797,777,894  2,908,327,356,465  56%  
2020/2021  1,601,016,386,868  3,211,490,363,999  50% 
2021/2022  1,940,971,132,408  3,473,135,105,212  56% 
2022/2023  2,059,281,671,520  3,614,183,369,857  57% 
  
The Government has engaged in m ajor development projects, thus increasing the 
estimated gross  expenditures over the last five years, without due consideration of 
performance in revenue collection  for prior years . This has in turn resulted to an increase 
in borrowing s from bot h the domestic and foreign markets to fund the budget  deficits . The 
projected expenditure seems to drive the revenue collection projections as opposed to 
actual revenue collections driving the projections of expenditures.  
 11 
 1.3.3  Actual Revenue as per Audited Rev enue Statements  
  
During the 2022/2023 financial year, total revenue recorded under various revenue 
statements as received by the National Government amounted to                                               
Kshs. 2,166,911,930,466  representing an increase of Kshs. 138,675,090,516  or 7% 
compared to actual collections of Kshs.2,028,236,839,950 realized in the previous year. 
This is illustrated in Table 1 3 below:  
 
 
 
 
 
Table  13: Comparison of Actual Receipts with the Pr ior Year  Receipts  
 
 
 
Details  2022/2023  
Actual  
Receipts  
(Kshs.)  2021/2022  
Actual  
Receipts  
(Kshs.)  Increase/  
(Decrease)  
(Kshs.)   
Percentage 
of Increase/  
(Decrease)  
Recurrent 
Revenue  2,096,109,695,792  1,967,190,835,775  128,918,860,017  7% 
Development 
Revenue  70,802,234,674  61,046,004,175  9,756,230,499  16% 
Total  2,166,911,930,466  2,028,236,839,950  138,675,090,516  7% 
 
The total revenue of Kshs.2,166,911,930,466 for the year 2022/2023 comprised of 
Kshs. 2,096,109,695,792  and Kshs.70,802,234,674 relating to Recurrent and 
Development revenue, respectively. However, the actual ordinary revenue (tax and non -
tax income receipts) of Kshs .2,166,911,930,466 reported in the audited revenue 
statements during the year differs with the o rdinary revenue receipts of 
Kshs.2,059,281,671,520 reflected in the National Exchequer Account  by 
Kshs. 107,630,258,946 .  
 
The actual revenue of Kshs.2,166,911,930,466 transferred to the Exchequer and reported 
in the audited revenue statements during the year has been reconciled with the ordinary 
revenue receipts of Kshs.2,059,281,671,520 reflected in the National Exchequer Account 
(NEA) as detailed in Table  14 below:  
 
Table  14: Reconciliation of Ordinary Revenue  
 
 Amount  
(Kshs.)  Amount  
(Kshs.)   
Reason for Adjustment  
Total  Revenue Disbursed to 
Exchequer as per Revenue 
Statements   2,166,911,930,466   
Additions     
Miscellaneous  Revenue 
Received in NEA  782,153,117   Revenue received directly by 
Exchequer  
Unspent Balances Received in 
NEA 16,181,006,639   Revenue received directly by 
Exchequer  
The Judiciary  87,530,147   Revenue accounted by 
Judiciary in 2021/2022 but 
received in NEA in 2022/2023  12 
  Amount  
(Kshs.)  Amount  
(Kshs.)   
Reason for Adjustment  
State Department of Mining  23,809,241   Revenue accounted by Mining 
in 2021/2022 but received in 
NEA in 2022/2023  
State Law Office  - Registration 
of Companies and Other 
Services  31,800,267  17,106,299,411  Revenue accounted by State 
Law in 2021/2022 but 
received in NEA in 2022/2023  
Sub-total   2,184,018,229,877   
Deductions     
The National Treasury – 
Development Revenue  70,802,234,674   Included in proceeds from 
external borrowing in NEA  
Ministry of Defence  - AMISON 
Revenue  2,929,485,108   MOD revenue included in 
proceeds from external 
borrowing in NEA  
AMISON Revenue  4,849,200,000   Received directly by TNT and 
included in RoR Recurrent  
The National Treasury - GIPE  45,990,954,87 9  Revenue included in RoR 
Recurrent  
East Africa Tourist Visa Fee 
Collection Account  164,683,702  124,736,558,36 3 Revenue included in RoR 
Recurrent  
Ordinary Revenue as per 
Exchequer Account   2,059,281,671,5 20  
 
Further, analysis of estimated receipts indicates that Actual Recurrent Revenue collected 
during the year reflected an under -collection of Kshs.62,517,602,646 while there was a 
shortfall of Kshs.28,742,125,707 or 37% reported under Development Revenue  as 
detailed in Table 1 5 below :  
 
 
 
Table 15: Shortfall in Revenue Receipts  
 
  
Details    
Estimated  
Receipts 
(Kshs.)  Actual Receipts  
(Kshs.)  Revenue  
Shortfall / 
(Overcollection ) 
(Kshs.)  % Over  
(Shortfall) / 
(Over collection)  
Recurrent 
Revenue  2,158,627,298,438  2,096,109,695,792  (62,517,602,646 ) 3% 
Development 
Revenue  99,544,360,381   70,802,234,674  (28,742,125,707 ) 29% 
Total  2,258,171,658,819  2,166,911,930,466  (91,259,728,353 ) 4% 
   
   
1.4 The National Exchequer Account as at 30 June, 202 3  
  
1.4.1  The statement of receipts and payments for the National Exchequer Account for 
the year ended 30 June, 202 3 reflects an overall surplus  of Kshs. 2,000,936,532 compared 
to a deficit of Kshs.20,663,751,757 for the prior year as at 30 June, 20 22. However, after 
taking into consideration the Exchequer balance of Kshs. 616,548,9 51 brought forward 
from 20 21/2022, the result is an overall net surplus of Kshs.2,617,485,483 as at                          
30 June, 202 3 as follows:  
 13 
  2022/2023 
(Kshs.)  2021/2022 
(Kshs.)  
Total Receipts  3,244,791,327,712  3,057,721,853,257  
Total Issues  3,242,790,391,180  3,078,385,605,013  
Surplus/(Deficit) for the Year  2,000,936,532  (20,663,751,757 ) 
Exchequer Balance Brought Forward  616,548,951  21,280,300,708  
Exchequer Balance as  at 30 June  2,617,485,483  616,548,951  
 
  
 
1.4.2  The Exchequer balance of Kshs. 2,617,485,483  as at 30 June, 202 3 is arrived as 
follows:  
 
   
 
 
 
Exchequer Bank Balance as at 30 June, 2023   Amount  
(Kshs.)  
 
12,359,200,266  
Add:   Revenue in transit    24,157,935,976  
Less:  Uncleared items (Exchequer disbursements after                      
30 June, 2023)  (33,899,650,760)  
Exchequer Cash Book Balance as at 30 June, 2023  2,617,485,483  
 
   
1.4.3  Out of the total Exchequer issues of Kshs. 3,242,790,391,180 , an amount of 
Kshs. 679,293,975,001 or 21% was issued in Quarter 1, Kshs. 689,927,607,370 or 21% 
was issued in Quarter 2,  Kshs. 719,495,697,571 or 22% was issued in Quarter 3 while 
Kshs. 1,154,073,111,240 or 36% was issued in Quarter 4 as detailed in Table 1 6 below:  
 
Table 16: Exchequer Issues in 2022/2023  
 
 
Type  Quarter 1 
Exchequer 
Issues  
(Kshs.)   Quarter 2 
Exchequer 
Issues  
(Kshs.)   Quarter 3 
Exchequer 
Issues  
(Kshs.)   Quarter 4 
Exchequer 
Issues  
(Kshs.)   
Total  
(Kshs.)  
Recurrent  276,109,776,373  274,462,629,617  264,140,147,064  406,855,523,516  1,221,568,076,570  
Development  68,055,751,149  53,691,388,458  53,041,427,222  133,243,778,054  308,032,344,882  
CFS 264,790,649,215  291,023,381,436  330,652,129,408  427,123,809,670  1,313,589,969,729  
County  
Government s 70,337,798,264  70,750,207,859  71,661,993,877  186,850,000,000  399,600,000,000  
Total Exchequer 
Issues  679,293,975,001  689,927,607,370  719,495,697,571  1,154,073,111,240  3,242,790,391,181  
% of the Total 
Exchequer Issue  21% 21% 22% 36% 100%  
1.4.4  Further, out of Kshs.1,154,073,111,240 issued in Quarter 4,  Kshs.228,407,340,511 
or 20% was issued in the month of April 2023, Kshs.285,306,904,414 or 25% was issued 
in May 2023 while Kshs.640,358,866,315 or 55% was issued in June, 2023. In addition, 
out of the amount of Kshs.640,358,866,315 indicated as issued in June 2023, 
Kshs .606,459,215,555 or 95% was issued in June 2023 while the remaining balance of 
Kshs.33,899,650,760 or 5% was issued  on 3 July, 2023 but backdated to 30 June , 2023 . 
 
1.4.5  As indicated above, the Exchequer balance of Kshs.2,617,485,484 excludes 
Kshs.33,899,650,760 relating to uncleared  Exchequer releases to  Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies, Pensions and Public Debt that were disbursed after the end 14 
 of the financial year. This is contrary to Article 260 of the Constitution which states that 
financial year means the period of twelve months ending on the thirtieth day of June or 
other day prescribed by National legislation , and Regulation 97(4) of the Public Finance 
Management (National Government) Regulations, 2015 , which states that an a ctual cash 
transaction taking place after the 30 June, shall not be treated as pertaining to the 
previous financial year. In addition, even though the financial statements are prepared in 
accordance with cash basis of accounting method under the Internatio nal Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS), the transactions were recorded as if they related to the 
year ended 30 June, 2023 contrary to IPSAS cash a ccounting . Management explained 
that the late Exchequer releases were occasioned by late receipt  of revenues.  
 
As a result of late Exchequer releases , both the National Government  and County 
Governments entities were left with limited time to absorb the funds.  There is also a risk 
of inefficient utilization of resource by entities leading to wastage of public resources.  This 
disrupts the performance of government programs by slowing down the attainment of 
entities’ objectives and service delivery to the citizens.    
1.4.6  Receipt  of Kshs. 3,244,791,327,712  into the National Exchequer Account during the 
year 2022/2023 comprised of Ordinary Revenue and Other Receipts in form of Loans and 
Grants, and Treasury Bonds as follows:  
 
 
   
Type of Receipt  Amount  
 (Kshs.)  Total  
(Kshs.)  
a)   Ordinary Revenue    
  Tax Income   1,961,969,728,861   
  Non-Tax Income (Profits and Dividends, 
Immigration Visas, Fines, Penalties and 
Forfeitures, Miscellaneous Revenue, etc.)  97,311,942,659  2,059,281,671,520  
 
b)  (i)  Loans and Grants    
  External Grants  15,302,899,443   
  External Loans  473,804,599,230  489,107,498,673  
 (ii)  Domestic Borrowing    
  Treasury Bills (Net)  -  
  Treasury Bonds  696,402,157,519  696,402,157,519  
  Total Receipts   3,244,791,327,712  
 
1.4.7  Issues from the National Exchequer Account during the year                                           
amounted  to Kshs.3,242,790,391,180 and comprised of Exchequer transfers                                                             
of Kshs.1,221,568,076,571, Kshs.308,032,344,880, Kshs.1,313,589,969,729 and 
Kshs.3 99,600,000,000 in respect of National Government  Recurrent Votes, Development 
Votes, Consolidated Fund Services and County Governments, respectively. There was a  
total  underfunding of the approved expenditure by an amount of Kshs.377,361,987,759 
or 10% as tabulated in Table 1 7 below:  
  15 
  
Table 17: Underfunding of Approved Expenditure  
 
 
 
 
Details  Approved Net  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)    
Actual Issues 
(Kshs.)  Under Funding  
(Kshs.)   
Percentage  
Variance  
Recurrent Votes   1,268,812,430,857  1,221,568,076,571  (47,244,354,286 )  4% 
Development Votes   373,998,242,001   308,032,344,880   (65,965,897,121 )  18% 
Consolidated Fund Services   1,577,741,706,081  1,313,589,969,729  (264,151,736,352 ) 17% 
County Governments   399,600,000,000   399,600,000,000   -    0% 
Grand Total   3,620,152,378,939  3,242,790,391,180  (377,361,987,759 ) 10% 
 
1.4.8  The underfunding of the development budget by 18% was attributed to delayed 
disbursement of donor funds  and delayed counterpart funding from the Government.  Low 
allocation of development budget and u nderfunding  of development projects is likely to 
affect the rate of development in the Country as envisaged in the National Development 
Plan, Vision 2030  and achievement of critical Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).   
 
 
 
 
 
1.5 Management of Public Debt – Kshs .10,264,939,001,661  
 
  
  
1.5.1  The outstanding amount of public debt has increased over the years from                   
Kshs .5,451,153,803,416 reported in the year 201 8/2019 to Kshs .10,264,939,001,661  
reported in the year 2022/2023. This represents an increase of Kshs .4,813,785,198,245  
or approximat ely 88% over the five (5) year  period as tabulated in Table 1 8 below:  
 
Table 18: Growth of Public Debt in the Last Five Years  
 
Financial 
Year  External Debt 
(Kshs.)  Internal Debt  
(Kshs.)  Guaranteed 
Loans  
(Kshs. ) Total Debt   
(Kshs.)  
2018/2019  2,752,467,840,668  2,698,685,962,748  - 5,451,153,803,416  
2019/2020  3,240,193,767,182  3,128,600,060,451  - 6,368,793,827,633  
2020/2021  3,753,484,243,264  3,635,219,144,950  157,219,741,914  7,545,923,130,128  
2021/2022  4,076,028,476,708  4,257,564,791,323  145,356,697,726  8,478,949,965,757  
2022/2023  5,276,331,977,801  4,818,378,066,403  170,228,957,457  10,264,939,001,661  
 
The findings are graphically presented below:  
 16 
 Figure 6: Growth of Public Debt in the last Five Years  
 
  
1.5.2  The outstanding amount of public debt of Kshs. 10,264,939,001,661 exceed ed the 
maximum debt ceiling of Kshs.10  Trillion approved by Parliament through Legal Notice 
No.89 of 26 May,  2022  which provides that the national public debt shall not exceed ten 
trillion shillings.  
 
1.5.3  The outstanding debt of Kshs. 10,264,939,001,661 , however does not include 
payment arrears ( pending bills ) amounting to Kshs.196,692,656,020  which are current 
liabilities owed to providers of goods and services reported under  Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies  (MDAs ) and Donor Funded Projects  during the year under review . It does 
not include other liabilities and bank overdrafts incurred by national public sector entities  
including State -Owned En terprises (SOEs) .   
1.5.4  Further, expenditure on public debt has increased from Kshs. 827,036,163,185 
reported in 201 8/2019 to Kshs. 1,200,608,836,164 incurred in 202 2/2023 financial year 
denoting an increase of Kshs. 373,572,672,979 or 45% over the five (5) year period as 
shown in Table  19 and Figure 7 below:  
 
 
 
Table 19: Public Debt Expenditure  
 
 
Financial Year   
Public Debt 
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Increase / 
(Decrease)                
per Year  
(Kshs.)   
Percentage 
Increase /(Decrease)              
per Year  
2018/2019  827,036,163,185  - - 
2019/2020  704,789,802,097  (122,246,361,088 ) (15%) 
2020/2021  884,919,345,869  180,129,543,772  26%  
2021/2022  1,041,304,135,476  156,384,789,607  18%  
2022/2023  1,200,608,836,164  159,304,700,688  15% 
 5.456.377.558.4810.26
024681012
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Amount in (Trillions Kshs.)
Total Debt per Financial Year17 
  
Figure 7: Public Debt Expenditure for the Last Five Years  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As indicated in Table 1 9 above, t he increase in  public debt expenditure fluctuated from a 
decrease of 15 % in 2019/2020 to an increase of 26 % reported in 20 20/2021 , 18% 
reported in 202 1/2022 and 15% reported in 2022/2023 . 
 
 
 
 
 
Further, t he proportion of public debt expenditure against the actual ordinary revenue 
(Tax and Non -Tax Receipts) fluctuated between 44% and 55% in the period 2018/2019 
to 2022/2023 as tabulated in Table 20 below:    
 
Table  20: Comparison of Public Debt Expenditure to Ordinary Revenue  
 
 
Financial Year   
Public Debt 
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Actual Ordinary Revenue/  
(Tax and Non -Tax 
Receipts)  
(Kshs.)   
 
 
Percentage  
2018/2019  827,036,163,185  1,509,057,905,396  55%  
2019/2020  704,789,802,097  1,618,797,777,894  44%  
2020/2021  884,919,345,869  1,601,016,386,868  55%  
2021/2022  1,041,304,135,476  1,940,971,132,408  54%  
2022/2023  1,200,608,836,164  2,059,281,671,520  58% 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
1.5.5  The total actual expenditure  of Kshs.1,351,963,671,093  for Consolidated Fund 
Services  comprise d of Kshs. 1,200,608,836,164 or 89% for Public Debt,                              
Kshs. 135,691,537,413 or 10% for Pension and Gratuities, Kshs. 15,663,297,516  or 1% for 
Salaries, Allowances and Miscellaneous Services, and a Nil expenditure indicated for 
Subscriptions to International Organizations as tabulated in Table 2 1 below:  
  827
7058851,0411,201
02004006008001,0001,2001,400
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Amount in (Billions Kshs.)
Public Debt Expenditure Public Debt Expenditure18 
    
Table  21: Consolidated Fund Services Expenditure  
 
    
Details  Estimated  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Actual  
Expenditure  
(Kshs.)  Percentage  of Actual  
Expenditure on  
Total CFS Actual  
Expenditure  
Public Debt  1,385,066,506,270  1,200,608,836,164  88.80%  
Pension and Gratuities  172,639,549,130  135,691,537,413  10.04%  
Salaries, Allowances and 
Miscellaneous Services  20,035,650,681  15,663,297,516  1.16%  
Subscriptions to International 
Organi zations  - - 0.00%  
Total   1,577,741,706,081  1,351,963,671,093  100%  
  
1.5.6  During the year under review, s ubscriptions to international organizations were  paid 
from the African Union and Other International Organizations Subscription Fund 
established through Gazette Notice No.10 of 2017 and the Public Finance Management 
(African Union and Other Internation al Organizations Subscription Fund) Regulations, 
2017.  However, the Government through The National Treasury was until 2017 paying 
subscriptions to International Organizations through Vote R53 – Consolidated Fund 
Services – Subscriptions to International Organizations under various legislation s namely: 
International Finance Corporations Act, CAP 466, International Dev elopment Association 
Act, CAP 465, Bretton Woods Agreements Act, CAP 464, the African Development Bank 
Act, CAP 492 and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency Convention, 1988 
(Revised 2010).  The National Treasury should cause the revocation or repea ling of the 
earlier laws to be in tandem with the current legislation and therefore avert the risk of 
making multiple payments to the international organizations.  
 
1.5.7  In the financial year 2022/2023, various pub lic debt issues  were raised includ ing; 
 
 
i. Payment of commitment fees totalling  Kshs. 1,435,968,272  on undrawn amounts in 
respect of loans signed between the Government of Kenya and foreign lenders. The 
commitment fees balance of Kshs.1,435,968,272 includes amounts of 
Kshs.50,590,803, Kshs.46,220,031 and Kshs.39,987,487 in respect of Ruiru II Dam 
Project, Last Mile Connectivity Project and Mwache Dam Project respectively, 
among others. Had the implementing Agencies put in place proper mechanisms to 
enable absorption of the committed credit within the agreed timeframe s, the payment 
of commitment fees would have been minimized. The National Treasury , being the 
overall supervisor of Governm ent Ministries, Departments and Implementing 
Agencies should  ensure that programmes and projects are ready for execution 
before committing the Government with  credits.  
 
 
 
ii. The outstanding amount of public debt of Kshs. 10,264,939,001,661 as at                          
30 June, 202 3 does not include loans and overdrafts held by other National and 
County Governments entities. The National Treasury  indicated that it did not 
guarantee any loan to County Governments and State Agencies during the year. 
Further, The National Treasury  also indicated that where a State Agency secures a 
loan, it is the responsibility of the Board of Directors of that Agency to ensure that 19 
 the amount is repaid and is not charge able to the Consolidated Fund. However, the 
Natio nal Government is obliged to bail out any guaranteed obligations defaulted by 
County Governments and State Agencies . The outstanding obligations guaranteed 
by the Government of Kenya is reported under Section 1.7 of this Summ ary Report.  
 
 
 
iii. The Government has continued to default on servicing an amount of 
Kshs. 11,039,138,761  in respect of three (3) loans advanced by an international 
commercial bank towards the construction of Arrror Dam (Kshs. 2,861,297,485 ), Itare 
Dam (Kshs. 5,348,242,211 ) and Kimwarer Dam ( Kshs. 2,829,599,065 ). Default on 
debt repayment exposes the Government to risks of legal suits that may lead to 
punitive penalties and subsequent loss of public resources.  Further, the projects 
have not been implemented thus denying services to the citizens . 
 
iv. External debt  (inclusive of guaranteed loans) rose from Kshs. 4,221,385,174,434 to 
Kshs. 5,446,560,935,258 or 29% compared to  internal debt which increased from 
Kshs.4,257,564,791,323 to Kshs.4,418,378,066,403 or 13%. During the year under 
review, interest payments  on domestic borrowings amounted to  
Kshs.457,206,007,989 while interest payments on foreign borrowings amounted to 
Kshs.154,679,317,706 . The cost of domestic borrowings was therefore three times 
the cost of external borrowings even though  domestic debt comprised 47% of the 
total debt.  Management has not indicated measures put in place to guard against 
the excessive domestic borrowings which may have a negative impact on the 
country’s interest rates, inflation rates and may lead to crowding out of private 
investors due to reduced loanable funds in the market  and disruption in the financial 
services . 
 
 
1.5.8  The growth in public debt is attributed to disbursements of new loans to the 
Government by various Development Partners and additional  borrowings from the 
domestic market through Treasury Bonds and Treasury Bills to fund the budget. Further, 
the public debt balance of Kshs.10,264,939,001,661  includes amounts of 
Kshs.17,788,755,686 and Kshs.76,456,927,038  in respect of pre -1997 GOK debt  and 
bank overdraft respectively, all due to the Central Bank of Kenya. The bank overdraft of 
Kshs.76,456,927,038  did not exceed the limit of Kshs.97,048,556,620, being five percent 
of the audited national government revenue of Kshs.1,940,971,132,408 for the financial 
year 2021/2022. Management therefore adhered to Section 15(3) of the Public Finance 
Management Act, 2012 which states that a national government bank overdraft facility 
shall not exceed five per cent of the most recent audited national govern ment revenue.  
    
 
1.6  Outstanding  On-Lent Loans - Kshs. 974,199,319,038  
  
The summary schedule of outstanding loans as at 30 June, 202 3 reflects total outstanding 
loans of Kshs. 974,199,319,038  which represents a n increase of Kshs. 53,508,779,535  or 
approximately 5.8%  of the total outstanding loan balance of Kshs. 920,690,539,503 
reported as at 30 June, 2022. The balance of Kshs. 974,199,319,038  due from fifty -seven 
(57) institutions , includes new loans issued in 2022/2023 totalling Kshs .28,033,571,399.  
However, as reported in the previous year, seven (7) institutions with outstanding 
balances amounting to Kshs.11,987,980,020 did not confirm their loan balances as at            
30 June, 2023 as detailed in Table 22 below:  
 20 
 Table  22: Institutions which did not Confirm Loan Balances 
 
 
 
 
No. Institution  Lender  Financial 
Year  Purpose   
Status of 
Institution  Amount 
Outstanding                   
as at                               
30 June, 2023  
(Kshs.)  
1 Local 
Government 
Loans Authority  Ministry of 
Local 
Government  1955/1956  Loans to various 
Local Authorities  Transferred 
to respective 
County 
Gover nments  7,594,273,720  
2 Mumias Sugar 
Company 
Limited  The National 
Treasury  2016/2017  Bailout package 
to finance 
turnaround 
strategy  In 
receivership  3,000,000,000  
3 Uchumi 
Supermarkets 
Limited  The National 
Treasury  2016/2017  Fund Company 
turnaround 
strategy  Not in 
operation  1,200,000,000  
4 Nairobi City 
Council  Ministry of 
Local 
Government  1967/1968  Nairobi Water 
Supply  Transferred 
to County 
Government  
of Nairobi  102,333,760  
5 Kenya Urban 
Transport 
Various Towns  Ministry of 
Local 
Government  1994/1995  Urban transport 
study and 
design  Transferred 
to respective 
County 
Governments  40,706,140  
6 Halal Meat 
Products  Ministry of 
Agriculture  1974/1975  Construction of 
abattoir/ slaughte
rhouse  in Ngong  Not 
operational  27,701,420  
7 Mombasa 
Pipeline Board  Ministry of 
Water  1959/1960  Construction of 
Mombasa Water 
Supply  Not 
operational   22,964,980  
 Total        11,987,980,020  
 
Further, and as was reported during the 2021/2022 financial year, the total outstanding 
loans balance of Kshs.974,199,319,038 includes loans amounting to 
Kshs. 19,597,984,196  which were  due for redemption at diverse dates over the years but 
had not been  repaid. During the year , the affected institutions did not make any repayment 
against their respective  loan balances as detailed in Table 23 below:  
 
Table  23: Non-Performing Loans Issued to Local Entities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
No.  
 
 
 
Institution   
 
 
 
Lender   
 
 
Financial 
Year   
 
 
 
Purpose   
 
 
Status of 
Institution  Amount 
Outstanding as 
at                                 
30 June, 2023  
(Kshs.)  
1 Local 
Government 
Loans 
Authority  Ministry of 
Local 
Government  1955/1956  Loans to various 
Local Authorities  Transferred 
to respective 
County 
Governments  7,594,273,720  
2 Mumias Sugar 
Company 
Limited  The National 
Treasury  2016/2017  Bailout package 
to finance 
turnaround 
strategy  In 
receivership  3,000,000,000  21 
  
 
 
 
No.  
 
 
 
Institution   
 
 
 
Lender   
 
 
Financial 
Year   
 
 
 
Purpose   
 
 
Status of 
Institution  Amount 
Outstanding as 
at                                 
30 June, 2023  
(Kshs.)  
3 Agro -Chemical 
and Food Co. 
Ltd Ministry of 
Energy  1994/1995  
 For Agro -
Chemical 
Project in 
Muhoroni 
(Molasses)  Institution in 
existence but 
requested for 
write off   2,941,884,000  
4 National Water 
Conservation 
and Pipeline 
Corporation  The National 
Treasury  1999/2000  Sabaki Wellfield 
Rehabilitation 
Project  Institution in 
existence but 
requested for 
write off  2,460,874,897  
 
5 Uchumi 
Supermarkets 
Limited  The National 
Treasury  2016/2017  Fund Company 
turnaround 
strategy  Not in 
operation  1,200,000,000  
 
6 National 
Irrigation 
Board  The National 
Treasury  2006/2007  Natural 
Resources 
Management 
Project  Institution in 
existence but 
requested for 
write off  1,128,486,779  
 
7 Kenya Meat 
Commission Ministry of 
Livestock  
 
The National 
Treasury  1960/1961  
 
 
2019/2020  Purchase of 
Livestock 
(Drought 
mitigation)  Institution in 
existence but 
requested for 
write off  
 
 640,241,100  
 
 
300,000,000  
8 Catering Levy 
Trustee/Utalii 
College  The National 
Treasury  1996/1997  Refurbishing of 
Kenya Utalii 
Hotel  
 Institution in 
existence but 
requested for 
write off  122,000,000  
 
9 Nairobi City 
Council  Ministry of 
Local 
Government  1967/1968  Nairobi Water 
Supply  Transferred 
to County 
Government 
of Nairobi  102,333,760  
10 Various Local 
Authorities  Ministry of 
Local 
Government  1994/1995  Urban transport 
study and 
design  Transferred 
to respective 
County 
Governments   40,706,140  
11 Halal Meat 
Products  Ministry of 
Agriculture  1974/1975  Construction of 
abattoir/ slaughte
rhouse  in Ngong  Not 
operational  27,701,420  
 
12 Mombasa 
Pipeline Board  Ministry of 
Water  1959/1960  Construction of 
Mombasa Water 
Supply  Not 
operational   22,964,980  
13 Mumias 
Outgrowers 
Company 
Limited  Ministry of 
Agriculture  1969/1970  Sugar Cane 
Development  
 Not in 
operation  16,517,400  
 Total      19,597,984,196  
 
 
Some of the entities with outstanding loan balances continue to perform dismally and 
require constant/periodic government bailouts. Non -repayment of the loans has led to the 
write -offs of the loans as bad debts , opportunity costs in funding other critical areas and 
eventual loss of public funds.   
 22 
 In addition, the summary schedule of investments by the Cabinet Secretary, The National 
Treasury , in various companies reflects total investments of Kshs.112,446,941,373. 
Included in the balance are seven (7) companies with investments of 7,213,217 shares 
valued at Kshs.144,263,695 that are non -performin g as detailed  in Table 24 below:  
 
Table 24: Non-Performing Investments  
 
 
 
 
 
No.  
 
 
 
Institution  Date of 
Investment 
as per  Share 
Certificate  Status  % 
Shareholding  Number 
of 
Shares   
 
Nominal 
Value  
(Kshs.)  
1 Kenya 
Farmers 
Association  1/8/1959  Institution exists 
though Government 
not currently listed 
as a shareholder   
 
 
 
 
 
 1 20 
2 National 
Agricultural 
Chemical & 
Fertilizer Ltd  7/7/1980  Company struck off 
the register  No information  2,084,998  41,699,960  
3 Busia Sugar 
Company  22/1/1978  Not in operation  33 1,485,675  29,713,500  
4 Nyari Estate 
Limited  10/9/1980  Not in operation  No information  2,500  50,000  
5 Kenya Poultry 
Limited  22/1/2007  Dissolved  No information  4 20 
6 Mercat (k) 
Limited  1/8/1970  Dissolved  No information  39 195 
7 Ken-Ren 
Chemicals and 
Fertilizers 
Limited  30/6/1975  Dissolved  No information  3,640,000  72,800,000  
 Total     7,213,217  144,263,695  
 
There was no disclosure of m easures put in place to ensure that the dormant investments 
report their returns.  
 
 
1.7 Outstanding Obligations Guaranteed by the Government of Kenya  
  
1.7.1  The statement of outstanding obligations guaranteed by the Government of Kenya 
as at 30 June, 202 3 reflects  an outstanding balance of Kshs.152,317,825 being capital 
and interest owed by the Cereals and Sugar Finance Company. However,  the balance 
was not supported by any verifiable records and documents . Further,  the summary 
statement of public debt (Debt Stock)  for the year ended 30 June, 2023 reflected  
guaranteed debt from only three (3) entities totalling  Kshs. 170,228,957,457  (excluding 
owed by the Cereals and Sugar Finance Company ) as detailed in Table 2 5 below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 25: Outstanding Obligations Guaranteed by GOK  
 
 
 
Agency   Outstanding Government 
Guaranteed Debt as at 30 June, 202 2 
(Kshs.)  
Kenya Airways  88,223,867,803  
Kenya Ports Authority   79,490,515,426  
Kenya Electricity Generating Company PLC  2,514,574,228  
Total  170,228,957,457  
1.7.2  The parent Ministries for the Agencies indicated above did not prepare and submit 
for audit, their respective statements of outstanding obligations guaranteed by the 
Government of Kenya as at 30 June, 202 3 contrary to the requirements of Sections 81(1) 
and 81 (2) (c) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012. Only The National Treasury  
prepared and submitted for audit a statement of outstanding obligations guarante ed by 
the Government of Kenya which reflected an outstanding balance of Kshs.152,317,825 
being capital and interest owed by the Cereals and Sugar Finance Company.  
   
1.7.3  Consequently, the total amount of outstanding obligations guaranteed by the 
Government of  Kenya reflected in the statement s submitted for audit by The National 
Treasury  is understated by Kshs. 170,228,957,457 . Failure to prepare th e respective 
statements is not only a breach of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 but also an 
indicator that the total Government Guaranteed Debt could not be confirmed  as it is 
understated . 
 
2.0 Pending Bills  
  
During the year under review, payment arrears ( pending bills ) totalling 
Kshs .196,692,656,020  as disclosed by various entities were not settled but were instead 
carried forward to the 2023/2024 financial year. The pending bills balance comprise d of 
Kshs.130,810,823,729 and Kshs .65,881,832,291  reported under Ministries,  Department 
and Agencies (MDAs) and Donor Funded Projects respectively .  
 
 
2.1 Pending Bills - Ministries, Department and Agencies –                             
Kshs.130,810,823,729  
  
2.1.1  The reported pending bills for Ministries, Department and Agencies (MDAs) for the 
year ended 30 June, 202 3 increased by Kshs. 73,341,293,328  or by 128% to 
Kshs.130,810,823,729 from the previous years’ reported amount of 
Kshs.57,469,530,401. The amount of pending bills for MDAs reported in the last five (5) 
years is shown in Table  26 below:  
 24 
  
Table 2 6: Pending Bills for the Last Five Years  
 
Financial Year  Pending Bills for MDAS  
(Kshs.)  
2018/2019           80,477,945,730  
2019/2020         101,109,118,284  
2020/2021           72,315,870,508  
2021/2022           57,469,530,401  
2022/2023         130,810,823,729  
  
 
Figure 8  below indicates the trend of pending bills in the last five (5) years:  
 
 Figure 8: Pending Bills Trend in the Last Five (5) Years 
   
2.1.2  Payment of pending bills forms a first charge of the budget as required by The 
National Treasury circulars and Section 74(4) of the Public Finance Management                          
Act, 2012 which states that an Accounting Officer engages in improper conduct in relation 
to a national government entity if the Officer fails, without reasonable excuse, to pay 
eligible and approved bills promptly in circumstances where funds are provided  for in the 
budget. The failure to settle bills in the year to which they relate is mainly attributed to 
inadequate budgets as a result of starting new projects or activities before completion of 
projects and activities started in prior years .  
  
 
    
2.1.3  In addition, t he closing balance of pending bills in a previous year is usually not 
taken into consideration during the formulation of the budget for the subsequent year. This 
means that the subsequent year’s budget is unlikely to be sufficient to settle unpa id  
     
 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     80 101 
72 
57 131 
 - 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Pending Bill Amounts in Billions of Kshs.
Financial Year
Amount Pending Bills Trend25 
 commitments relating to operations of the previous year and at the same time fund the 
programmes for a subsequent  year. It is also an indication of Accounting Officers 
committing funds which are not available. Failure to settle the bills during the year to which 
they relate adversely affects the subsequent year’s budgeted programmes , as it may lead 
to reallocation of funds or non -delivery of critical services.   
 
2.1.4  Further, the pending bills have continued to put pressure on the scarce resources, 
with some of these bills attracting penalties  and interests , thereby putting more strain on 
the available resources. The suppliers of goods and services to public entities have  faced 
unwarranted financial charges from their financiers as they supply goods and services on 
credit to the Government without proper arrangements or agreements on credit facilities 
with the Government. Failure to settle the bills has an effect of withholding circulation of 
cash in the economy and affects the smooth operations of su ppliers and Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). Similarly , failure to pay within stipulated timelines affects 
revenue collection due from Value Added Tax (VAT) and Withholding Tax. All these 
factors viewed holistically call for the Executive to put in place strict measures to deter the 
escalation of pending bills  and to enforce fiscal discipline in public sector entities . 
 
 
2.1.5  The Ministries, Department and Agencies (MDAs) which reported unpaid bills as at 
30 June, 2023 are listed in Table 27 below:  
  
Table 27: Ministries, Department and Agencies (MDAs) Disclosed  Bills 202 2/2023 
   
No. Vote  Ministry/Dept ./Agency  2021/2022  
Amount in  
(Kshs.)   2022/2023  
Amount in  
(Kshs.)  
1 1081  Ministry of Health  4,799,030,226  41,169,835,759  
2 1011  The Executive Office of the President  15,950,133,545  12,347,481,810  
3 1169  State Department for Crop Development  9,396,775,821  12,058,660,230  
4 1041  Ministry of Defence  1,755,046,240  9,803,533,442          
5 1071  The National Treasury  - 7,703,536,902  
6 1023  State Department for Correctional Services  200,444,053  6,832,031,742  
7 1025  National Police Service  - 5,479,251,913  
8 2031  Independent Electoral and Boundaries 
Commission  2,083,171,000  4,857,441,000  
9 1032  State Department for Devolution  1,373,260,296  2,845,999,363  
10 1203  State Department f or Wildlife  2,715,987,161  2,708,390,651  
11 2091  Teachers Service Commission  158,711,298  2,463,219,054  
12 1222  State Department for Regional and Northern 
Corridor Development  2,451,916,061  2,445,742,328  
13 1094  State Department for Housing and Urban 
Development  1,634,354,560  2,079,726,669  
14 1026  State Department for Internal Security and 
National Administration  - 1,871,133,025  
15 1213  State Department for Public Service  1,478,128,900  1,819,995,350  
16 1053  State Department for Foreign affairs  - 1,688,976,030  
17 1052  Ministry of Foreign Affairs  701,161,995  1,688,976,030  26 
 18 1123  State Department for Broadcasting and 
Telecommunications  257,017,835  1,451,012,668  
19 1024  State Department for Immigration and Citizen 
Services  5,508,101,204  1,313,208,464  
20 1035  State Department for Development of the Arid 
and Semi -Arid Lands (ASALs)  38,346,731  931,581,524  
21 2043  Parliamentary Joint Services  558,027,648  866,476,108  
22 1095  State Department for Public Works  1,293,499,573  746,098,212  
23 2021  National Land Commission  531,496,362  731,555,911  
24 1112  State Department for Lands and Physical 
Planning  204,369,942  627,915,455  
25 1261  The Judiciary  431,181,964  613,357,588  
26 1108  State Department for Environment and 
Climate Change  670,596,158  522,030,199  
27 1122  State Department for Information 
Communication Technology and Digital 
Economy  178,918,663  464,897,210  
28 1109  State Department for Water and Sanitation  - 263,348,964  
29 2041  Parliamentary Service Commission  152,814,517  240,645,617  
30 1162  State Department for Livestock  189,748,207  196,150,451  
31 1252  State Law Office and Department of Justice  53,634,452  171,258,741  
32 1166  State Department for the Blue Economy and 
Fisheries  112,169,309  166,386,002  
33 1184  State Department for Labour and Skills 
Development  24,327,228  152,719,109  
34 1132  State Department for Sports Development  223,356,294  152,517,830  
35 1065  State Department for Higher Education and 
Research  65,448,989  144,255,504  
36 1291  Office of the Director of Public  Prosecutions  - 115,275,255  
37 1175  State Department for Industry  90,272,732  106,695,480  
38 1271  Ethics and Anti -Corruption Commission  - 99,106,066  
39 1092  State Department for Transport  23,764,147  97,487,972  
40 1192  State Department for Mining   93,883,644  
41 1083  State Department for Public Health and 
Professional Standards  - 88,595,209  
42 1054  State Department for Diaspora Affairs  - 82,276,638  
43 1221  State Department for East African Community 
Affairs  13,818,936  74,415,086  
44 1012  Office of the Deputy President  - 58,244,497  
45 1202  State Department for Tourism  13,060,343  54,645,486  
46 1134  State department of Culture and Heritage  48,170,956  49,859,497  
47 1214  State Department for Youth Affairs  66,186,271  45,861,162  
48 1173  State Department for Cooperatives  - 35,102,093  
49 2042  National Assembly  290,665,300  30,631,929  
50 1174  State Department for Trade  66,980,829  30,105,866  
51 2011  Kenya National Commission on Human Rights  13,242,693  28,391,539  27 
  
 
2.2  Pending Bills - Donor Funded Projects – Kshs .65,881,832,291  
 
Pending bills amounting to Kshs .65,881,832,291  reported under Donor Funded Projects 
were not settled during the year but were carried forward to the 202 3/2024 financial year 
as detailed in Appendix F.  
 
The total pending bills of Kshs .196,692,656,020  reported under Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies (MDAs) and Donor Funded Projects in 202 2/2023 does not include an 
amount of Kshs.39,186,214,050 accumulated entitlement to the Equalisation Fund.   
Further, the total pending bills balance of Kshs .196,692 ,656,020 does  not include 
contingent liabilities totalling Kshs. 26,500,316,513  reported by various MDAs as detailed 
in Table 2 8 below:  
 52 1212  State Department for Gender and Affirmative 
Action  3,608,065  19,084,805  
53 1194  State Department for Petroleum  - 17,517,819  
54 1185  State Department for Social Protection and 
Senior Citizen Affairs  - 11,344,625  
55 2061  Commission on Revenue Allocation  2,788,890  9,715,083  
56 1069  State Department for Implementation of 
Curriculum Reforms  - 6,796,280  
57 1066  State Department for Early Learning and 
Basic Education  429,299,232  6,726,280  
58 2131  The Commission on Administrative Justice   
5,533,492  6,694,879  
59 2121  Office of the Controller of Budget  - 4,331,239  
60 2101  National Police Service Commission  2,182,652  4,276,649  
61 1013  Office of the Prime Cabinet Secretary  - 3,899,685  
62 2051   
Judicial Service Commission  18,781,934  3,007,852  
63 1311  Office of the Registrar of Political Parties  39,151,275  2,643,583  
64 2081  Salaries and Remuneration Commission   
- 2,303,651  
65 1093  State Department for Maritime and Shipping 
Affairs  5,832,493  1,311,736  
66 1152  State Department for Energy  644,980,895  949,489  
67 2141  National Gender and Equality Commission  - 295,800  
68 1109  Ministry of Water, Sanitation and Irrigation  305,255,357  - 
69 1194  Ministry of Petroleum and Mining  132,775,321  - 
70 2071  Public Service Commission  58,733,175  - 
71 1072  State Department for Planning  2,789,002  - 
72 2151  Independent Policing Oversight Authority  480,179  - 
  Total    57,469,530,401  130,810,823,729  28 
 Table 2 8: Contingent Liabilities for MDAs  
Vote  Ministry/Dept ./Agency  Contingent 
Liability  
(Kshs.)   Description  
1112  State Department for Lands 
and Physical Planning  19,543,057,083  Contingent liability relating to legal  
cases ruled against  the State 
Department  
1162 State Department for  Livestock    4,025,950,000  Contingent liability for Court cases 
against the State Department  
1041  Ministry of Defence  2,793,356,434  Contingent liability for various Court 
cases against the Ministry  
1023  State Department for 
Correctional Services  70,673,471  Contingent liability for thirty -three 
(33) determined Court cases 
against the State Department  
1222 State Department for Regional 
and Northern Corridor 
Development       67,279,525  Contingent liability for pending 
claim by a contractor  
 Total  26,500,316,513   
 
In addition , the total pending bills balance of Kshs .196,692,656,020 does not include 
contingent liabilities amounting to  Kshs. 3,505,334,958 reported under various donor 
funded project s as detailed in Table 2 9 below:  
 
Table 2 9: Contingent Liabilities for Donor Funded Projects  
 
 
Donor Funded Project  Implementing 
Agency  Contingent 
Liability  
(Kshs.)   Description  
1 Dualling of Magongo Road 
(A109L): Phase II (FIDIC 
EPC/TURNKEY BASED)  Kenya National 
Highways 
Authority  2,851,043,577  Contingent liability 
relating to claim by 
road contractor  
2 Support to Road Sector 
Policy: 10th EDF Rural 
Roads Rehabilitation 
Project in Kenya 
No.KE/FED/023 -571 Kenya Rural 
Roads Authority  642,516,239  Contingent liability 
for pending court  
case against the 
Authority and State 
Department for 
Roads  
3 Support of the  Health Care 
Financing Strategy - 
Reproductive Health - 
Output Based Approach 
Project  (Credit BMZ NO. 
Kenya 201065853  Ministry of Health  11,775,142  Contingent liability 
various  Court cases  
 Total   3,505,334,958   
  
 
 
 29 
 3.0 Summary of Audit Observations    
3.1 Overall Summary of Audit Opinions  
  
For the financial year ende d 30 Ju ne, 2023,  a total of three hundred and forty (340) 
National Government financial statements  (excluding National Funds) in respect of 
Ministries, Department and Agencies (MDAs), Revenue Statements, Donor Funded 
Projects, and Other clients such as Public Debt, Nation al Exchequer Account, Public 
Trustee, Business Registration Service, Staff Mortgage and Car Loan Schemes, among 
others were examined and audit opinions issued as summarized in Table 30 below:  
 
 
 
 
     
Table 30: Audit Opinions on National Government Entities Excluding National Funds  
 
 
No.  
Client Type  Type of Opinion Issued  
Unmodified  Qualified  Adverse  Disclaimer   Total  
1.  MDAs - Voted Entities  50 30 
 - -  80 
2.   Revenue Statements  6 7 -  -  13 
3.   Donor Funded Projects  153   66 1  - 220 
4.   Others  19 6 1 1  27 
  Total  228 109 2 1 340 
 
The tabulation above indicates that two hundred and twenty -eight  (228) financial 
statements  had an unmodified opinion; one hundred and nine (109) financial statements 
had a qualified opinion , two (2) financial statement had an adverse opinion  while one (1) 
financial statement had a disclaimer of opinion  as listed in Appendices A, B, C  and D 
respectively. The analysis does not include the National Funds which are reported on 
separately.    
  
Further,  Table 3 1 below illustrates the trend of audit opinions on Nationa l Government 
Entities (excluding National Funds) for the last three years.  
 
Table 3 1: Audit Opinions Trend on Government Entities  
 
  2020/2021  2021/2022  2022/2023  
Unmodified  188 117 228 
Qualified  109 144 109 
Adverse  3 3 2 
Disclaimer  2 2 1 
Total  302 326 340 
 
 
 
 
 
 30 
 3.2 Summary of Audit Opinions Excluding Donor Funded Projects and 
National Funds  
 
 
3.2.1  A total of one hundred and twenty  (120) National Government financial statements  
(excluding Do nor Funds and National Funds), were examined during the year ended              
30 June, 202 3. Table 32 below indicates the type of audit opinion expressed on the 
financial statements in the last five years  on National Government  entities excluding Donor 
Funded Projects and National Funds;  
    
Table 32: Audit Opinions on Financial Statements in the Last Five Years 
 
  2018/2019   2019/2020   2020/2021   2021/2022  2022/2023  
Audit 
Opinion  No. of   
FS    % No. of 
FS   % No. of 
FS % No. of  
FS     % No. of  
FS  % 
      
Unmodified  31 32.60%  42 44.20%  42 46.70%  57 52.30%  75 62.50%  
Qualified  54 56.80%  47 49.50%  45 50.00%  50 45.90%  43 35.80%  
Adverse  7 7.40%  4 4.20%  2 2.20%  1 0.90%  1 0.80%  
Disclaimer  3 3.20%  2 2.10%  1 1.10%  1 0.90%  1 0.80%  
Total  95 100%  95 100%  90 100%  109 100%  120 100%  
  
3.2.2  The number of financial statements with unmodified opinion increased from 52.3% 
reported in the previous year to 62.5%.  The number of financial statements with qualified 
opinion decreased from 45 .9% to 35.8%. There was a drop in the percentages of adverse 
and disclaimer of opinion compared to the previous year.  Overall, there has been an 
improvement in presentation of the financial statements . This is attributed to use of IFMIS, 
guidance by The National Treasury  through circulars and issuance of reporting t emplates 
by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (PSASB). Audit review s leading to 
revision s and amendments of the financial statements to correct errors  during the audit 
process , has also contributed to improvement s in disclosure and presentation  of the 
financial statements .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31 
 Figure 9  below depicts the analysis of audit opinions:  
 
Figure 9: Audit Opinions on Financial Statements for the last Five Financial Years  
 
 
 
3.3 Audit of Revenue Statements   
  
3.3.1  During the year under review, thirteen (13) revenue statements were audited. Out 
of these, six (6) revenue statements had an unmodified audit opinion while seven (7) 
revenue statements had a qualified opinion. Table s 33, 34 and 3 5 below indicate  the 
Revenue Statements that were audited and the corresponding audit opinions.  
 
 
 
 
 
Table 33:  Summary of Audit Opinions on Revenue Statements  
Opinion  No. of Revenue 
Statements  Percentage  
Unmodified  6 46% 
Qualified  7 54% 
Total  13 100%  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
3142 425775
54
474550
43
7
421 1321 1 1
01020304050607080
2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021 2021/2022 2022/2023Number of Reports
Unmodified
 Qualified
 Adverse
 Disclaimer32 
 Table 34: Revenue Statements whose Opinion was Unmodified  
 
 
 
  
  
Collecting 
Entity/Department  Amount 
Collected During 
the Year  
(Kshs.)  Amount 
Transferred to 
the Exchequer  
(Kshs.)  Other Issues Reported 
Under Other 
Matter/Compliance/ 
Internal Controls  
1.  The National Treasury 
– Development 
Revenue  70,802,234,674  70,802,234,674  Under -collection of revenue  
2.   Ministry of Defence  4,337,107,775  4,337,107,775  No issue reported  
3.   The Judiciary  2,660,708,959  2,414,778,649  Delay s in remitting revenue to 
the Exchequer                                                    
4.  Ministry of Lands and 
Physical Planning  1,658,156,439  1,644,943,627   Lack of land valuation 
index  
 
 Under -collection of 
revenue  
 
 Delayed implementation of 
Ardhisasa digital platform 
5.   The National Treasury 
– Pensions 
Department  282,191,910  282,191,910  Risk of unremitted 
contributions  
6.   East Africa Tourist Visa 
Fee Collection Account  164,683,700  164,683,700  No issue reported  
  Total  79,905,083,457  79,645,940,335   
  
Table 35: Revenue Statements whose Opinion was Qualified  
        Collecting  
Entity/Department   Amount 
Collected During 
the Year  
(Kshs.)  Amount 
Transferred to 
Exchequer  
(Kshs.)   
 
Main Reasons for 
Qualification  Other Issues 
Reported under 
Compliance/ Internal 
Controls  
1.  The National 
Treasury - GIPE - 
Outstanding 
Loans  45,990,954,878  45,990,954,878   Unconfirmed 
outstanding loan 
balances   Dormant Loans  
 
 Dormant 
Investments  
2.  State Department 
for Interior and  
  Citizen  Services  18,045,073,078  18,045,073,078   Long outstanding 
arrears of revenue 
totalling  
Kshs.631,156,762  No additional issue 
reported  
3.  State Department 
for Mining  3,717,649,241  3,720,319,241  • Unsupported and long 
outstanding arrears of 
revenue   • Non-compliance with 
Licensing 
requirements  
• Irregular reduction of 
cement levy payable  
• Irregular waiver of 
ground rent  
• Unlicensed mining 
operations  33 
         Collecting  
Entity/Department   Amount 
Collected During 
the Year  
(Kshs.)  Amount 
Transferred to 
Exchequer  
(Kshs.)   
 
Main Reasons for 
Qualification  Other Issues 
Reported under 
Compliance/ Internal 
Controls  
• Irregular issuance of 
mineral exploration 
rights  
4.  Business 
Registration 
Service  1,151,632,724  1,119,250,453   Understatement of  
transfer    to 
Exchequer Account  
 
 Failure to comply 
with financial 
reporting templates  
 
 Unconfirmed bank 
balance s  Unresolved prior 
year matters  
5.  State Law Office 
and Department 
of Justice  231,320,943   201,306,646   Discrepancies 
between revenue 
statements and 
IFMIS balances  
  Failure                                 
to       surrender                   
Kshs.168,776,500 
to Exchequer  
 
 Failure to prepare 
and submit 
marriage fees 
period  reports  
 
 Failure to provide 
registration of 
marriage services 
at Sub - County 
level 
6.  The National 
Treasury – 
Recurrent 
Revenue  2,043,286,570,723  2,018,058,774,395   Unallocated / 
(unidentified)  
revenue balance  
 Unreconciled 
arrears of revenue   Long outstanding 
arrears of revenue    
 Under budgeted 
revenue  
7.  State Department 
for Blue Economy 
and Fisheries  130,311,440  130,311,440   Presentation and 
disclosures in the 
revenue statements  
 
 
 Delay in remitting 
revenue    
 Unreconciled cash 
book and bank 
balances   Unresolved prior 
year matters  
  Total  2,112,553,513,027  
 2,087,265,990,131  
      
  
 
3.4 Audit of Financial Statements for Voted Provisions  
 
 
3.4.1  The actual expenditure reflected in the financial statements for the National 
Government voted provisions for the year 202 2/2023 was Kshs .3,214,583,369,857 
compared to Kshs.3,132,735,105,212 reported in the year 202 1/2022. The expenditure of 
Kshs .3,214,583,369,857 was recorded in the combined MDA’s Recurrent and 
Development votes which received various audit opinions as listed in Appendices                      
A to D and as summarized in Table 35 and Figure 10  below:   
                    
 
      
 34 
 Table 36:  Summary of Audit Opinions on Combined Recurrent and Development Expenditure  
 
Opinion No. of Financial 
Statements  Percentage  
 Unmodified  50 62% 
 Qualified  30 37% 
 Other  1 1% 
 Total  81 100%  
 
 
 
3.4.2  Table 36 above indicates that there were eighty -one (81) financial statements for 
entities with voted provisions during the year under review.  No material misstatements 
were found in financial statements of fifty (50) entities and hence they got an unmodified 
opinion. The financial statements for thirty  (30) entities were however issued with a 
qualified/modified opinion due to omissions and in some cases material misstatements.  
                   
3.4.3  The financial statement relating to  my Office (Office of the Auditor -General) is 
audited and reported on separately to Parliament by an Independent Auditor appointed by 
the National Assembly in accordance with Article 226(4) of the Constitution.  
 
Figure 10: Audit Opinions on Financial Sta tements 
 
 
Unmodified 
62%
Qualified
37%
Other 
1%35 
  
3.4.4  There has been a general improvement in the presentation of financial statements 
and maintenance of accounting records  in the last two financial years (2021/2022 and 
2022/2023) compared to prior years. The improvement is mainly attributed to adoption of 
the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) accounting framework by 
the National Government entities as prescribed by the Public Sector Accounting 
Standards Board (PSASB). In addi tion, other interventions by The National Treasury , 
aimed at improving accountability in the public sector have influenced this improvement. 
Audit recommendations , directives and recommendations  from Parliamentary hearings 
have also led to improved account ability in some areas. Prior high level engagement 
sessions between the Auditor -General and the Accounting Officers has also led to more 
involvement in the audit process and enhanced supervision by Accounting Officers 
leading to improvements.  The presentation of the financial statements is , however, still 
below expectations when viewed holistically . There is  need to hasten migration from cash 
to accrual accounting for both National and County Government entities  which is 
envisaged as critical for e nhancing accountability, transparency and disclosures in the use 
of public resources.  
 
3.5 Key Audit Observations Reported Under MDA s 
The National Treasury - Vote 1071  
  
i. Government Digital Payments (e -Citizen)  
 
The Government Digital Payments Unit is mandated to digitize all payments made to  
Government, to increase revenue collection, minimize the cost of collection and enh ance 
service delivery. It ensures that citizens, non -citizens and business entities can access 
Government Services online and make payments electronically and conveniently, using 
their preferred method of payment , round -the-clock and from wherever they may  be in 
the world.  
By April 2013, only a few government services were partially digitized and most 
Government receipts were manual. A survey done by The National Treasury found out 
that over a third of the payments were cash -based, presenting a high opportunity for 
leakage and abuse of the manual system, in addition to high cost of collection.  
To address these loopholes, the e-Citizen portal, www.ecitizen.go.ke , was subsequently 
developed in 2014 as a payment gateway and was integrated with electronic payment 
platforms including mobile telephone money payment services. Other than providing 
resource mobilization for Government and enhancing service delivery to Kenyans, e -
Citizen is a facilitator in providing a digitized financial system  and powering a digitally 
driven and inclusive economy. The e -Citizen programme cuts across the Social and 
Economic Pillar of the Vision 2030 and is linked directly to Technology and Innovation as 
well as Public Sector Reforms . 
 
Despite the strategic importance of e -Citizen, the audit of e -Citizen revenue accountability 
statements for the year ended 30 J une, 2023 revealed the following anomalies:  36 
 a. During the year , a total of Kshs.26,406,115,341 inclusive of an amount of 
Kshs.15,570,013,245 in respect of receivers of revenue was collected through the 
e-Citizen Government Digital Payments (GDP) platform. However, review of the                    
e-Citizen portal and  the revenue statements revealed variances between balances 
reflected in the revenue statements, the e-portal system and the ledger , casting 
doubt on the completeness and accuracy of receipts  reported by the receivers of 
revenue  amounting to Kshs.15,570,01 3,245.  
 
b. Cash books and bank reconciliation statements for six (6) bank accounts holding 
a total amount of Kshs.436,307,875 at two local banks were not provided for audit.  
 
c. There were u nsupported p rior year balances of Kshs.146,426,357 for which details 
of the bank accounts for the prior year balances and reasons for the long delay in 
transfer of the funds were not provided . 
 
d. The National Treasury had been sued by a system developer claiming ownership 
of the e -Citizen system. Although Management indicated that the court granted an 
out of court negotiation with the plaintiff, the outcome of the negotiation was not 
disclosed as at the time of the audit.  
 
e. The Government d id not have full control of the system and was relying 
significantly on the vendor for some critical functions. The vendor ha d significant 
control of the system which ma de it difficult for the Government Digital Payments 
Unit (GDPU) to perform critical system configurations and changes to support 
growth , including on -boardi ng of new government services. Lack of full control of 
the system exposes the Government to the risk of revenue leakage s, lack of full 
accountability, system unavailability or downtime, security vulnerabilities and lack 
of business contin uity threats . Further, the adequacy and effectiveness of the IT 
controls on  e-Citizen did not guarantee integrity of the data processed through the 
system.  
 
f. Reconciliations and settlements for payments to Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies were  done manually on two days in a week. The  reconciliation  
procedures were  tedious and entail ed physical transfer of documents for 
approvals. Further, manual processes introduce d risk of human errors and delays 
in transfer of payments. In view of the new gov ernment policy which requires all 
payments for services to be done through e -Citizen, the manual system of 
reconciliation and settlement is not sustainable. Management should therefore 
ensur e real time reconciliation and settlement of payments . 
 
g. The Consultancy Agreement between the System Vendor and The National 
Treasury  was not provided for audit review. It was , therefore , not possible to 
establish the terms of the consultancy and the responsibilities of each party in the 
management of the e -Citizen Government Digital Payments System.  
 
The Office is currently undertaking a special audit on e-Citizen Government Digital 
Platform. This special audit is informed by the current strategic importance of e -Citizen in 
the financial architecture of Government. The special audit is expected to provide 
highlights on the credibility and reliability of the e -Citizen system including assur ance on 
whether data processed through the system is accurate and complete. Further, the 37 
 special audit will interrogate both IT and physical security, governance arrangements and 
the adequacy of the controls in place.   
 
ii. Loans to Kenya Airways Limited  
 
During the year under review, an amount of Kshs.10,000,000,000 was transferred to 
Kenya Airways as on -lent loan. This was in addition to other loan disbursements to the 
Company totalling Kshs.31,270,000,000 remitted between 2019/2020 and 2021/2022 
resultin g to total loan amount of Kshs.41,270,000,000. Review of documents and 
correspondences between The National Treasury and the entity revealed the following;  
 
 The loans issued had accrued interest and penalties totalling Kshs.1,778,075,609 
that remained outs tanding bringing the total accumulated loan to 
Kshs.43,048,075,609  as at 31 December, 2022 .  
 
 The Government paid an amount of Kshs.12,326,894,172 guaranteed debt on 
behalf of the Company, being foreign loan repayment of Kshs.10,635,604,751 and 
finance cos ts of Kshs.1,691,289,421  out of which an amount of Kshs.7,812,582,663 
was made under Article 223 of the Constitution  of Kenya . As a result, the total 
outstanding amount due from Kenya Airways as at  30 June, 2023 totalled  at 
Kshs.55,374,969,781. 
 
 There was no evidence that The National Treasury had entered into any formal 
agreement with Kenya Airways on how the guaranteed loans repayments would be 
recovered and whether the Airline had provided any security to the G overnment as 
a fall back.  
   
 
iii.  Unapproved Expenditure on Purchase of Shares  
 
The National Treasury paid an amount of Kshs.6,196,584,631 for acquisition of sixty 
percent (60%) shareholding of Telkom Kenya  during the year . The expenditure was 
incurred under Article 223 of the Constitution. Although  The National Treasury submitted 
the expenditure for approval by the National Assembly as part of the supplementary 
budget as required by Section 44(1) of the Public Finance Ma nagement Act, 2012, the 
expenditure was not approved by the National Assembly.  
  
iv.  Long Outstanding Pensions Payable  
 
Audit of the financial statements for Consolidated Fund Services – Pension and                             
Gratuities revealed  outstanding returned  pensions  (recredited  cheques) totalling 
Kshs.6,715,563,752. The balance  has been increasing over the years mainly due to the 
demise of the pensioners or for lack of information on dependents . Some of t he pensions 
payable have been outstanding for more than ten years . The amount may be more as 
other payments may be accumulating  in the bank accounts without being refunded back.   
State Department for Foreign Affairs  - Vote 1053  
  
The following issues were noted in respect of Kenya Missions abroad;  
i. Unutilized Development Funds  in three (3) Missions namely Washington 
(Kshs. 48,630,314 ), London  (Kshs. 1,758,950,03 1) and Addis Ababa 38 
 (Kshs. 66,596,506 ) all totalling Kshs.1, 874,17 6,851. The balance has increased over 
the years as a result of failure to surrender the unutilized development funds at the 
end of the financial year. Management did not explain how the amount would be 
utilized without factoring the same in the budget process.    
 
ii. Lack of ownership docume nts for Kinshasa Chancery.  The Government of the 
Republic of Kenya has four (4) plots in Kinshasa but one plot which hosts the 
Chancery did not have ownership documents.  
 
iii. Delayed purchase of Chancery for Kenya Mission in London. The lease for the 
Chancery for Kenya Mission in London expired on 10 October, 2021, and 
subsequently the State Department transferred an amount of Kshs.1,669,999,550 
in the financial year 2021/2022 and 2022/2023 for the purchase of Chancery 
building. However, the process of acquisit ion had been halted and the Mission 
continue s to lease the Chancery.  
 
iv. The Ambassador’s residence and staff houses for Kenya High Commission in 
Pretoria were constructed at a cost of Kshs.765,000,000 but the Ambassador’s 
residence remained vacant since it had not been furnished.  
 
v. During the year under review, the State Department disbursed to Missions abroad 
a total of Kshs.12,257,183,258 on a quarterly basis. However, the disbursements 
were made on the last week of the respective quarters resulting to delayed payment 
of foreign service allowance s and salaries to home ba sed and local staff 
respectively. The Missions also delayed in payments of office expenses and 
procurement process.  
 
vi. Missions lacked guidelines to effectively undertake procurements in the Host 
Countries. This was due to different and unique legal, regulat ory, and business 
environments that impeded application of Kenya’s legal and regulatory procedures 
in procurement of goods, works and services. Lack of Missions specific guidelines 
affected the efficiency of procurement processes hence impacting negatively  on 
service delivery by the Missions.  
 
vii. During the year under review, the State Department incurred exchange losses  
totalling Kshs.353,010,380 due to differences in exchange rates. The exchange 
losses negatively affected the liquidity of the Missions resul ting in additional pending 
bills amounting to Kshs.332,062,297 in the Missions.    
State Department For Immigration and Citizen Services  - Vote 1024  
 
 
 
i. Delay in Delivery of e -Passport Booklets  
 
The State Department entered into a contract with an international printing  company for 
the supply and delivery of three hundred and thirty four thousand (334,000 ) AK, BK, CK 
and DK e -passport series booklets. The contract was signed on 21  July, 2022 with the 
last delivery expected in March , 2023. However, the deliveries were made  up-to          
October , 2023 in contravention of Article 5 of the contract  agreement .  Late delivery of 
the e -passport booklets adversely affect ed the operations of the State Depa rtment  and 
issuance of passports to the public.  
 39 
 ii. Inefficiencies  in Digitization and Storage of Birth and Death Records  
 
Review of records provided for audit revealed that the Civil Registration Services (CRS)  
had successfully digitized an estimated forty -six million  (46,000 ,000)  records. However, 
as at the time of the audit in November, 2023, only sixteen million  (16,000,000 ) digitized 
records had been uploaded to the Electronic Document Management System (EDMS). 
The CRS also had approximately ten million (10,000,000)  records that had not been 
digitized. Failure to upload record s to the EDMS was as a result of a lack of adequate 
storage capacity in the CRS servers . Further, the CRS did not have staff  exclusively 
deployed  to the digitization of records.  
 
In addition, the Department had not developed proper measure s for offsite data backup 
and recovery procedures , despite the sensitivity of data  handle d. Lack of offsite backup 
exposes the Service to loss of data as physical hard drives are susceptible to physical 
damage,  theft and unauthorized access , casting doubt on the effectiveness of controls 
and measures in place for digitization of birth and death  records . 
 
State Department for Technical, Vocational Education and                   
Training – Vote 1064  
 
 
Unconfirmed Transfers to Other Government Units  
 
a. An amount of Kshs.188,774,600 indicated as a transfer to the Permanent 
Secretary of the State Department was not supported by documents for  audit 
review.   
 
b. During the year under review, an additional amount of Kshs.5,029,545,850 was 
transferred to two hundred and forty -five (245) colleges and institutes. However, 
the following unsatisfactory matters were noted;  
 
 An amount  of Kshs.196,515,127  disbursed to thirty- nine (39) colleges and 
institutes , was not recorded or disclosed as received in the financial statements 
of the receiving institutions .  
 
 Amount  of Kshs.346,660,654 acknowledged by forty -six (46) colleges and 
institutes were not recorded or disclosed by the State Department.  
 
 Eighty -seven (87) technical and vocational colleges did not provide expenditure 
returns for disbursements of Kshs.492,626,3 14 to the State Department.  
 
 Ten (10) technical and training institutes did not confirm receipt of funds   totalling  
Kshs. 637,450,517 transferred to them.  
 
As a result of the above anomalies, the accuracy and completeness of transfers to other 
Government units of Kshs.12,486,008,764 could not be confirmed.  
 
State Department for Higher Education and Research - Vote 1065  
  
i. Irregular ities in Transfers to Other Government Units  
    
 
Review of transfers to other Government units totalling Kshs.82,550,137,837  revealed 
the following observations:   40 
 a. Records at Bomet University College did not confirm receipt of Kshs.59,430,648 
indicated as transferred to the University . 
 
b. An amount of Kshs.53,625,682 transferred and acknowledged by Tharaka 
University College as received was not recorded by the State Department  as 
disbursed . 
 
c. An amount of Kshs.80,000,000 indicated as transferred to Kenyatta University was 
not confirmed received by the University.  
 
d. There was o ver disbursement of Kshs.259,999,992  in capitation for universities 
students  in various Colleges .  
 
ii. Irregularities in Grants Transfers to Private Universities  
 
A special audit of the capitation  grants revealed that a total of Kshs.15,762,573,515 was 
disbursed to thirty -two (32) private universities for Government Sponsored Students 
(GSS)  for the period of seven (7) financial years from 2016/2017 to 20 22/2023 . The 
special audit revealed the following anomalies;  
 
 An amount of Kshs.201,638,928 was disbursed to fifteen (15) Universities in respect 
of capitation grants for four thousand five hundred twenty -one (4,521)  students  who 
were not placed by the Kenya Universities and College Central Placement Services 
(KUCCPS) ;  
 
 
 An amount of Kshs.412,729,628 was in respect of capitation grants for nine 
thousand four hundred and eighty -nine (9,489) students who had stayed beyond the 
durations of course programmes they were undertaking ;  
 
 
 An amount of Kshs.17,774,388 was in respect of double payments of capitation 
grants ;  
 
 
 An amount of Kshs.35,199,064 was in respect of capitation grants for students who 
had already graduated ;  
 
 
 An amount of  Kshs.53,594,188 was disbursed for students who had deferred their 
studies or were on long academic leave.  
  
iii. Failure to Prepare and Submit Financial Statements for Audit  
 
Although the State Department transferred amo unts of Kshs.29, 634,474 and 
Kshs.153,739,147 to the Biosafety Appeals Board and the Open University of Kenya 
respectively, both Institutions did not prepare and submit for audit separate financial 
statements for audit contrary to  Section 81(4)(a) of the Public Finance  Management                    
Act, 2012.  
 
iv. Non-Compliance with Section 53 of the Universities Act, 2012  on Universities 
Fund 
 
During the year under review,  the State Department for Higher Education and Research 
directly financ ed all the universities .  This was contrary to Section 53 (1 and 2) of the 
Universities Act, 2012 which provides that there shall be a Fund to be known as the 41 
 Universities Fund whose objective and purpose shall be to provide funds for financing 
universities.  
State Department for Early Learning and Basic Education – Vote 1066  
 
 
i. Unconfirmed Capitation for Free Primary Education and Free Day Secondary 
Education  
 
Review of capitation for Free Primary Education and Free Day Secondary Education 
revealed the following observations:  
 
a. Disbursement for Free Primary Education was done  manually and not through the 
National Education Management and Information System (NEMIS) hence the pupils ’ 
enrolment per school could not be confirmed.  
 
b. Field verification s carried out in sampled three hu ndred and twelve (312) Junior 
Secondary Schools (JSS) revealed the following;  
 
 Seven thousand three hundred and forty (7,340) students in one hundred and 
eighty -seven (187) of the sampled schools did not receive capitation.  
 
 
 Data used for JSS capitation was not verified by the respective Sub -County 
Offices before disbursement of funds to confirm whether all students were 
captured on NEMIS for funding of all JSS learners.  
 
 
 NEMIS , as configured , does not have a cutoff period and updates student s on 
continuous basis making it difficult to confirm the number of students at a 
specific time. Also the system does not register students without birth 
certificates and does not fund students over eighteen  (18) years.  
 
 Congestion was noted in grade seven (7) classes, with some classes having 
between eighty (80) to a hundred (100) learners.  
 
 Many schools did not have science laboratories.     
   
There is need for a regular reconciliation and update of student information in NEMIS to 
ensure the correct amount of capitation is disbursed to schools.  
ii. Competence Based Curriculum (CBC)  Classrooms  
There was p oor workmanship in construction of CBC Classrooms making it difficult to 
confirm value for money for an expenditure of Kshs.3,997,687,865 incurred in 
construction of the classrooms.  
 
iii. Staff Establishment  
 
The staff establishment reflects that the State Department is understaffed by five 
thousand two hundred and seventy -one ( 5,271) staff which may negatively affect 
education delivery.  
 
 
 42 
 iv.  Failure to Submit Financial Statements for Audit  
 
During the year under review, Kenya Girl Guides Association did not submit financial 
statements for audit , despite  recei ving Kshs.27,612,000 from the State Department.  
State Department for Environment and Climate Change – Vote 1108  
 
Lack of Equipment at Kenya Metrological Weather Stations  
 
Physical inspection undertaken at various Kenya Metrological Department’s weather 
stations across the Country revealed  its inability to report on the sunshine condition s due 
to lack of sunshine -card recorders which are not locally available. Further, it was observed 
that the Seismic Projects in Kakamega and Nakuru weather stations meant to monitor 
and record seismic activities were abandoned several years back  due to lack of funds to 
procure and install the re quisite equipment. In addition, the automatic weather station 
installed at Nakuru Weather Station had not been functional for more than one year. 
Various weather stations did not have  power backups despite being operational on a 24 
hours basis. Lack of equipment cast doubt on the effectiveness of the Kenya Metrological 
Department to deliver accurate weather reports . 
 
 
State Department for Petroleum - Vote 119 4 
 
i. Unsupported Stabilization of Petroleum Pump Prices Payments  
 
 
The State Department paid an amount of Kshs.62,495,828,161 to Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) as compensation for lower price s charged at the pump against actual 
set prices, as per stabilization of petroleum pump prices mechanism. However, review of 
documentation in respect of administration of the subsidies revealed the following 
weaknesses and anomalies:  
 
a. The State Department had not established  a Multi -Agency Team to review the total 
resource requirement and assess the sustainability of the fuel price stabilization 
programme as advised by  The National Treasury.  
 
b. The State Department did not develop and implement a governance framework for 
stabilization of fuel prices and compensation mechanisms as required by The 
National Treasury ; 
 
c. The State Department for Petroleum requested and received a total of 
Kshs.63,09 6,088,490 for purpose of fuel price stabilization. The requests were in 
respect of June -July 2022, July -August 2022 and August -September 2022 pricing 
cycles. However, review of expenditure records revealed that payments amou nting 
to Kshs.1,297,048,608 related to April -May 2022 and May -June 2022 pricing cycles 
which were not part of the funding requests and computation schedules . 
 
d. The State Department settled outstanding subsidy of Kshs.17,998,7 73,645 owed to 
forty-seven (47) oil companies through Bond Instrument referenced FXD/2023/003. 
However, the amount was not supported by volumes compensated and the pricing 
cycles to support the payments  were  not indicated.    
 43 
 ii. Importation of Refined Petroleum Products Under Government -to-Government 
Petroleum Importation Scheme  
 
The Government of Kenya made a policy shift on importation of petroleum products for 
the local and transit markets from Open Tender System (OTS) to Government to 
Government (G-to-G) framework.  The change was meant to mitigate against declining 
value of the Kenyan currency that was attributed to Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
operations , and thus reduc e pressure on foreign currency liquidity for the economy.  
Review of documents provided in respect of the G to G arrangement for importation of 
refined petroleum products revealed the following anomalies : 
 
a. Bilateral agreements governing purchase of refined petroleum products  between 
the Government of Kenya and that of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) were not 
provided for audit review. Further, the Supply Purchase Agreement (SPAs) with 
three oil companies supplying the products were not provided for review.  
 
 
b. The Letters of Support for the three importers were signed by the Cabinet 
Secretaries for The National Treasury and the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum, 
and the Director General of the Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority 
(EPRA). However, the role EP RA as an independent regulator in the agreements 
was not clear.   
 
c. Clause 5.3 of the Master Framework Agreement provides for maintenance of an 
escrow account for receipt of funds from importers under the Open Tender System 
(OTS) terms and conditions. However, documents supporting existence of the 
account and amounts depos ited and withdrawn from the account were not 
provided for audit review.  
 
d. The aggregate supply qualified for all importers amounted to 730,000 metric 
tonnes per month while the assessed national requirement was 950,000 metric 
tonnes.  Details on how the supply shortfall of 220,000 metric tonnes would be met  
were not provided .  
  
e. Under the arrangement,  The National Treasury would take responsibility for any 
funding shortfalls. However, Management did not indicate the source of funds or 
existence of budget provisions to credit the financing parties for any shortfalls 
arising in the collection account.    
 
f. Based on the evaluation of documents provided during the audit, an in -depth audit 
will be carried out on importation of petrol eum p roducts for the local and transit 
markets under the Government to Government (G to G) arrangement.  
  
 
 
iii. Delay in Implementation of Mwananchi Gas Project  
 
During the year under review, an amount of Kshs.76,500,000 was transferred to the 
National Oil Corporation of Kenya (NOCK) to refill cylinders for roll out of Mwananchi 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) project in Nairobi County. Mwananchi Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (LPG) Project was initiated by the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum in 
2016 and was intended to promote use of modern cooking fuels among the low -income 
households. The project entailed supply and distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas 44 
 (LPG) cylinders , grills, and burners to households at subsidized prices, and erection of 
facilities to store the cylinders at local distribution points. The National Oil Corporation of 
Kenya was engaged to implement the project with the role of ensuring that the LPG 
comp onents were distributed to the targeted households.  
 
The project was to be implemented in two modules whereby Module I entailed distribution 
of subsidized filled 6 Kg cylinders fitted with a grill and a burner in eleven (11) piloted            
Sub-Counties in Nairobi.  Module II involved distribution of filled 6 Kg cylinders with a smart 
metering device, a horse pipe and 2 low burner tabletop cookers. As at 30 June, 2023, 
an amount of Kshs.1,125,648,762 had been incurred on the purchase of LPG cylinders 
and accessories, inspection of the cylinders and accessories, purchase of two -burner low 
pressure tabletop cookers, lease of storage space, provision of security services and 
refilling of the cylinders. Review of the documents and records held at  the State 
Department revealed the following anomalies and implementation weaknesses:  
 
a. As reported in previous years, 79,057 6kg gas cylinders supplied under the project 
were found to be defective by an independent inspector who was contracted by the 
State  Department, following safety concerns raised by consumers leading to 
suspension of the project in 2019.  
 
b. Review of the records relating to the project and physical verification revealed that 
some 237,616 6kg cylinders purchased under Module I and 84,500 two-burner low 
pressure tabletop cookers purchased under Module II of the project, together with 
accessories, were yet to be distributed and were lying at the warehouses rented by 
the State Department and NOCK.  
 
c. There was uncertainty in the implementation  of the project due to lack of policies 
and implementation frameworks.  
 
Available information indicates that distribution of subsidized cylinders purchased  under 
Module s I and II will resume soon while a new project for distribution of 4.5  million 
cylinders to low -income households  is under way. However, Value for money on the 
expenditure of Kshs.1,125,648,762 incurred in the implementation of the Mwananchi Gas 
Project could not be confirmed.  
    
 
Ministry of Health  – Vote 1081  
 
i. Undisclosed Bank Balances  
  
Note 12A to the financial statements reflects bank balance of Kshs.304,951,441.  
However, the balance excludes an amount of Kshs.850,928,545 held in three (3) bank 
accounts. Further, the bank balances have not been reported separately in the respective 
Funds ’ financial statements. In addition, review of the bank accounts registe r revealed 
ten (10) bank accounts whose respective cash books, bank statements and certificates 
of bank balance were not provided for audit.  
  
ii. Unutilised Medical Equipment  
  
During the year under review, an amount of Kshs.2,341,127,802 was used for repair and 
maintenance of equipment under the Managed Equipment Services outsourced by the 
Ministry. However, physical verification in the month of September, 2023 in sampled 45 
 hospit als revealed that the contracts between maintenance service providers and the 
Ministry had expired. Therefore, some equipment , including renal dialysis equipment, 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) equipment, X -ray and other Imaging equipment were not 
functioning a nd had not been serviced as at September, 2023.  
 
Further, verification of the Microwave project with an estimated value of 
Kshs.135,000,000 revealed that the microwave equipment in Narok County was still in 
sealed containers. In addition, the Microwave e quipment in Kisumu County was 
functioning but had defect s that had not been corrected due to the absence of a 
maintenance contract.  
 
Value for money for the expenditure of Kshs.2,341,127,802 in respect of repair and 
maintenance of Managed Equipment Service s (MES) equipment and Microwave project 
could not be confirmed.  
 
iii. Payment of Salaries Outside the Payroll  
 
The statement of receipts and payments reflects compensation of employees amount of 
Kshs.14,157,676,754 which includes Kshs.766,458,883 that was paid outside the 
Integrated Personnel and Payroll Database (IPPD) system. Management confirmed this 
to be payme nts made to Agence Française de Development  (AFD) project, Cuban 
Doctors and Malaria vector specialists processed outside the system. This is contrary to 
The National Treasury ’s directive that require personnel emoluments to be processed and 
paid through IPPD.  
 
3.6 Audit of Donor Funded Projects  
 
The audit of donor funded projects revealed the following unsatisfactory matters:  
 
3.6.1  Low Absorption of Funds/Undrawn Balances  
 
During the year under review, there was low absorption of funds in fourteen (14) projects 
as detailed in Appendix G. Although the projects periods were end ing, some funds had 
not been absorbed, posing risk s that the projects timelines would end without 
implementing all the planned activities and the refore not meeting all the projects 
objectives.  
  
3.6.2  Ineligible Expenditures  
  
Ineligible expenditures amounting to Kshs.133,355,499 comprising  of Kshs.5,026,654, 
Kshs.37,624,046 and Kshs.90,704,799 relating to Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime 
Communications and Transport (MLVMCT)  Project – Kenya Maritime Authority, Kenya 
Off-Grid Solar Access Project (Credit Number 6135 -KE) and Danida Primary Healthcare 
(PHC) Support Program respectively  were observed .  
3.6.3  Failure to Close Projects and Idle Funds/Bank Balances  
 
The financing agreements stipulate the project commencement and closure dates after 
which Management are expected to commence closure procedures. However, the audit 
observed that Management had not commenced closure procedures for nineteen (19) 
projects an d programs whose financing agreements had lapsed as shown on Appendix 46 
 H. Further, some of the projects h ad idle funds/bank balances in their respective bank 
accounts amounting to Kshs .104,912,088.  
 
3.6.4  Comingling of Funds – Failure to Maintain Separate Bank Accounts for the 
Projects  
 
Contrary to provisions of Regulation 76(1) of the Public Finance Management (National 
Government) Regulations, 2015 and the financing agreements, twenty -one (21) projects 
failed to open separate bank accounts. Project funds were,  therefore, commingled with 
the funds of the implementing agencies as shown on Appendix I. 
 
3.6.5  Counterpart Funding Issues  
 
The Government of Kenya and the respective County Governments did not provide for 
and/or disburse to the projects counterpart funds in a ccordance with the financing 
agreements for at least thirteen (13) projects as shown on Appendix J. 
 
3.6.6  Procurement Issues  
 
There were instances where Management flouted provisions of the Public Procurement 
and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 and Regulations, 2020 as detailed in Appendix K. Some 
of instances noted were : 
 
 Signing of a procurement contract before lapse of fourteen (14) days contrary to 
Section 68(2) of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015.  
 
 Entering into a contract after the lapse of the tender validity period contrary to 
Clause 12.1 of the Request for Proposal Document and Section 135(3) of the 
Public Pro curement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015.  
 
 Failure to charge liquidated damages in accordance with Section 140(b) of the 
Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015.  
 
 Failure to prepare annual procurement plan contrary to Regulation 40 of the Public 
Procurement and Asset Disposal Regulations, 2020.  
 
 Contract variation exceeding 25%, contrary to Section 139(4)(e) of the Public 
Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015.  
 
3.7 Other Observations   
   
The observations described in this section formed the basis of various modified audit 
opinions expressed on the financial statements.  
 
3.7.1  Inaccurac ies in  the Financial Statements  
  
 
The audit raised several queries on the accuracy of the financial statements presented for 
audit. The major reasons for the inaccurac ies included:  
a) Difference s between supporting schedules and reported amounts . 
 
b) Mis-posting of entries - posting to wrong accounts, una uthorized reallocation of 
funds . 
 47 
 c) Variances between reported amounts and Ledger  Balance s.  
 
d) Understatement of  pending bills . 
 
e) Unreconciled variances .  
 
3.7.2  Inadequacies in the Integrated Financial Management Information System  
  
3.7.2.1  The Government of Kenya deployed IFMIS to improve systems for financial data 
recording,  tracking and information management. Two key benefits which the 
Government anticipated to reap from IFMIS are:  
 
(i) Improved financial controls through reliable and timely financial inf ormation.  
 
(ii) Improved accounting, recording and reporting of financial aspects through timely 
and accurate provision of financial data.  
 
These benefits are yet to be fully realized.  
 
3.7.2.2  The amounts reflected in the financial statements submitted for audit should 
correspond with balances extracted from IFMIS reports. However, the following 
inconsistencies were noted:  
 
i. Balances reflected in the financial statements submitted for audit were  at variance 
with balances in the Trial balance/Ledger s extracted from IFMIS.  
 
ii. Balances reflected in the financial statements /ledgers were at variance with 
balances in the IFMIS supporting schedules.  
 
iii. The reported balances for recurrent, development and deposit bank balances as well 
as cash in hand balances were at variance with the IFMIS amounts.  
 
iv. Some payments were made in IFMIS but could not be traced to the financial 
statements, whereas some payments in the financial records were not posted in 
IFMIS.  
 
v. There were instances where accounting for AIEs issued to National Government 
officers in County offices were not processed in IFMIS but were instead done 
manually, since the offices were not linked to IFMIS.   
 
vi. Review of the transactions in IFMIS reveale d cases where numerous  transactions 
were cancelled (voided) in the system but no evidence was provided to confirm that 
the cancellation was approved.  
 
vii. Override of internal controls was noted where an account was created in IFMIS under 
an individual’s name which occasioned loss of funds, an indication that the internal 
controls in IFMIS were not effective.  
 
3.7.2.3  The inadequacies point to both control weaknesses in the IFMIS system and  
evidence of  transactions processed manually outside IFMIS. The Government has 
invested heavily in the acquisition, re -engineering and maintenance of IFMIS since its 
inception. However, the perennial discrepancies  between IFMIS generated amounts and 
the financial statements amounts raise  concern s on the effectiveness and efficiency o f 48 
 the system. It is also an indicator of lack of adequate internal controls and governance 
and failure to perform monthly reconciliations.  
 
3.7.2.4  It was also noted that while the ledgers remain open for updating of transactions 
after 30 June until all Exchequer releases for the previous year are received and paid, the 
payment register is strictly based on 1 July to 30 June period.  This,  therefore, means that 
the transactions for a previous financial year are included in the succeeding financial 
year’s payment register report.  
  
3.7.2.5  Further, the accumulated cash book balances do not match with the debits and 
credits in the cash books. This was explained to be due to a time stamp in IFMIS, which 
carries forward the balance as at 30 June, notwithstanding the transactions that are 
normally backdated to ensure completeness and accuracy, especially during the closure 
of a particular period, be it monthly, quarterly or end of the financial year.   
 
3.7.2.6  For purposes of recording and reporting transactions for any given financial 
year, IFMIS should be set to only capture the transactions for the period as defined under 
Article 260 of the Constitution , that is the period of twelve months ending on the thirtieth 
day of June or any other day prescribed by National Legislation. Enforcing this can be 
made easy by incorporating a control in the IFMIS system that disables all dates falling 
outside the financial year under  consideration.  
 
3.7.2.7  Review of procurement processes in public procuring entities revealed that, by 
the time of the audit, the entities’ procurement processes had not been linked with the 
Integrated Financial Management Information System as per Executive Order No. 2 of 
2018. The Order had directed that by 01 January, 2019, The National Treasury  was to 
facilitate seamless integration of all public procurement entities to the Integrated Financial 
Management Information System and that by tha t same date, all Public Procuring entities 
would undertake all their procurement through the e -procurement module. Most of the 
non-complying procuring entities blamed The National Treasury  for failing to create the 
integration platform.  
 
3.7.2.8  The National Trea sury should ensure full implementation of IFMS to enable 
realization of the benefits that were envisaged . Some of the benefits to be gained include 
enhanced financial transparency, improved efficiency, better financial planning, 
enhanced accountability, re duced incidents of fraud and corruption and improved cash 
management.  
 
3.7.2.9  To address the weakness of cash accounting, public sector entities should 
migrate to  accrual accounting . Accrual accounting matche s revenue  and assets  against 
the expenses incurred in each financial period , thus present ing fairly the financial position 
and financial performance of the entity at a particular time.  Further, financial reports 
prepared using accrual basis give a more holistic view of the National Government’s  
financial position.  Thus, adopting  accrual accounting will enhance transparency, 
accountability and fiscal credibility.  
 
 
 
3.7.3  Unsupported Expenditure – Kshs.81,970,629,674    
During the year under review, the audit revealed unsupported                                                                  
expenditure  totalling  Kshs.81,970,629,674. This comprised Kshs.79,728,835,329  and                                                 49 
 Kshs .2,241,794,345  under Ministries, Departm ents and Agencies (MDAs) and Donor 
Funded Projects respectively, as detailed in Table 3 7 and 3 8 below :  
 
 
Table  37: Unsupported Expenditure  - MDAs  
 
 
No. Vote  Ministry/Dept ./Agency  Amount  
(Kshs.)  Description/ Details  
1 1194  State Department for Petroleum  62,564,528,161  Unsupported stabilization of 
petroleum pump prices amounting 
to Kshs.62,495,828,161 as 
compensation for lower prices 
charged at the pump and  
unsupported AIEs of 
Kshs.68,700,000 transferred to 
NOCK for purposes of refilling 
cylinders for rollout of Mwananchi 
LPG in Nairobi County  
2 1071  The National Treasury  16,196,584,631  Disbursement of a loan of 
Kshs.10,000,000,000 to Kenya 
Airways before loan agreements 
were signed between the GoK and 
Kenya Airways and unapproved 
expenditure of Kshs.6,196,584,631 
in respect of acquisition of sixty 
percent (60%) shareholding of 
Telcom Kenya that did not have a 
corresponding budget estimate.  
3 1072  State Department for Lands and 
Physical Planning  711,588,204  Unsupported legal costs for a court 
case which was not supported by 
the case files  
4 1108  State Department for Environment 
and Climate Change  140,683,587  Unsupported national tree planting 
campaign expenditure  
5 1065  State Department for Higher 
Education and Research  59,467,448  Unsupported transfers to Bomet 
University College and East African 
Centre for Excellence (ACE II) 
Project  
6 1192  State Department for Mining  31,567,149  Unsupported expenditures under 
use of goods and services  
7 2131  The Commission on  Administrative 
Justice  16,905,851  Unsupported use of goods and 
services expenditure  
8 1064  State Department for Technical, 
Vocational Education and Training  7,510,298  Unsupported compensation of 
employees  
    Total  79,728,835,329    
 
 
Table 38: Unsupported Expenditure - Donor Funded Projects  
No. Vote  Project   Amount  
(Kshs.)  Description/ Details  
1  Nuno -Modagashe Road Project - 
Kenya National Highways 
Authority  525,256,167  Unexplained and unsupported over 
expenditure  
2 1081  Covid -19 Health Emergency 
Response -  Ministry of Health   473,470,727  - Unsupported employee costs not 
in payroll of Kshs.3,462,500,  
 
- Unsupported purchase of goods 
and services of Kshs.439,567,417 50 
 No. Vote  Project   Amount  
(Kshs.)  Description/ Details  
and unsupported acquisition of 
non-financial assets of 
Kshs.30,440,810  
3 1065  USAID Boresha Jamii (UBJ) - 
State Department for Higher 
Education and Research  393,729,977  - Unsupported hiring of staff of 
Kshs.163,863,516,  
 
- Unsupported contractual 
expenditure paid as salaries and 
employees benefits of 
Kshs.130,716,685,  
 
- Unsupported salaries and other 
employees benefits of 
Kshs.97516441 and 
unsupported imprests and 
advances amounting to                         
Kshs. 1,633,335.  
4 1081  Danida Primary Healthcare (PHC) 
support Program - Ministry of 
Health  244,213,953  Grants for technical assistance to 
Counties of Kshs.213,069,767 and 
programme activities implemented 
directly by the donor of 
Kshs.31,144,186 not disclosed in 
the financial statements  
5 1064  East Africa Skills Transformation 
and Regional Integration Project -
Kenya Coast National Polytechnic 
- State Department for Technical, 
Vocational Education and 
Training  120,103,668  Payment to contractor not supported 
with an invoice and a valid tax 
compliance certificate  
6 1091  National Urban Transport 
Improvement Project Cr.  No.5140 
- IDA- Kenya National Highways 
Authority  93,563,270  - Unsupported acquisition of non -
financial assets of 
Kshs.60,347,397 relating to 
rehabilitation of roads,  
 
- Unsupported research, feasibility 
studies expenditure of 
Kshs.2, 613,040 and unsupported 
land compensation to Nairobi 
School of Kshs.30,602,833  
7 1214  Vijana Vuka na Afya (VIVA) Youth 
Programme – State Department 
for Youth Affairs  85,155,966  Unsupported other operating 
expenses paid by the donor directly 
to third parties  
8 1091  Sirari Corridor Accessibility and 
Road Safety Improvement 
Project: Isebania -Kisii-Ahero (A1) 
Road Rehabilitation - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  60,948,669  - Unsupported amount of 
Kshs. 4,500,000 paid to Persons 
Affected by the Project,  
 
- Unsupported payment for refund 
of VAT amounting to 
Kshs. 29,086,169 and 
unsupported payment to a 
consultant amounting to 
Kshs. 27,362,500 for capacity 
building and management of 
roads maintenance contract for 
youth women and persons with 
disability.  51 
 No. Vote  Project   Amount  
(Kshs.)  Description/ Details  
9 1108  Sound Chemicals Management 
Mainstreaming and UPOPS 
Reduction in Kenya - State 
Department for Environment and 
Climate Change  53,211,035  Unsupported expenditure on 
acquisition of non -financial assets  
10 1091  Roads 2000 Phase Two -Central 
Kenya Rural Roads Improvement 
and Maintenance Project - Kenya 
Rural Roads Authority  40,104,858  Transfers to other Government 
entities of Kshs.3,363,070 not 
supported with schedules and 
payment vouchers, Government 
counterpart funds of 
Kshs.15,000,000 received but not 
reported in the financial statements 
and Retention monies of 
Kshs.21,741,788 paid during the 
year but which had been expensed 
in the prior year’s thus leading to 
double payment.  
11 1091  Bagamoyo - Horo Horo - Lunga 
Lunga - Malindi Road Project 
(Phase I) ID NO: PZI -DBO -129 - 
Kenya National Highways 
Authority  36,928,659  Unsupported expenditure on 
acquisition of land  
12 1066  Kenya Primary Education Equity 
in Learning Project – State 
Department for Early Learning 
and Basic Education  23,785,960  Unsupported training expenses of 
Kshs.18,441,000, unsupported 
expenditure on fuel, oil and 
lubricants of Kshs.3,896,360 and 
unsupported transport payments to 
students of Kshs.1,448,600.  
13 1109  Lake Victoria Water and 
Sanitation Project CKE 1093 02M 
- Lake Victoria South Water 
Works Development Agency  17,849,475  Unsupported overpayment of 
expenditure to a contractor in 
relation to payment for works 
package 1.  
14 1091  Kapchorwa -Suam -Kitale & Eldoret 
Bypass Project No. P -ZI-DBO -
0183 - ADB (New) - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  16,058,817  Land compensation not supported 
with acknowledgement letters, 
receipts and payment documents  
15 1065  Support to Enhancement of 
Quality and Relevance in Higher 
Education, Science and 
Technology Project Grant/Credit 
Number - ADF/2 -  State 
Department for Higher Education 
and Research  15,000,000  Unsupported expenditure of 
Kshs.15,000,000 relating to repair of 
Wangari Mathai Institute of Peace 
and Environmental Studies  
16 1108  Integrated Programme to Build 
Resilience (IPBR) to Climate 
Change and Adaptive Capacity of 
Vulnerable Communities in Kenya 
NEMA 2023  - State Department 
for Environment and Climate 
Change  11,378,030  Amount paid to various staff for 
project monitoring but which was not 
supported with travel itinerary, date 
of travel, sites visited and activities 
undertaken.  
17 1091  Northern Corridor Transport 
Improvement Project IDA Credit 
No.s 3930 -KE and 4571 -KE - 10,283,971  Refurbishment of buildings not 
supported with documents like 
payment vouchers  52 
 No. Vote  Project   Amount  
(Kshs.)  Description/ Details  
IDA- Kenya National Highways 
Authority  
18 1108  Lake Victoria Environmental 
Management Project Phase III - 
State Department for Environment 
and Climate Change  5,380,468  Expenditure related to payments of 
goods and services were not 
supported by appropriate 
documentation.  
19 1169  Supporting Agricultural Input and 
Output Marketing Policy and 
Regulatory Reforms to Improve 
the Enabling Business 
Environment - State Department 
for Crop Development  5,178,050  The expenditure of Kshs.5,178,050 
was not supported with Authority to 
Incur Expenditure.  
20 1065  Eastern and Southern Higher 
Education Centres of Excellence 
(ACE II) Project (Credit NO.5798 -
KE) - State Department for 
Education and Research  4,260,900  Unsupported expenditure incurred 
on domestic travel and subsistence  
21 1108  Kenya Institutional Strengthening 
Project Phase XII 
(/KEN/SEV/86/INS/ (64) -State 
Department for Environment and 
Climate Change  2,424,825  Unsupported imprest payment to 
private company representatives 
whose identification was not 
provided  
22 1169  Revitalising Irish Potato 
Production for Covid -19 Affected 
Small -  Scale Producers Project 
(IFAD Grants No. 2000003589 
and 200000396600) - Agriculture 
and Food Authority  1,500,000  Unsupported expenditure on 
capacity building refund of farmers 
fares  
23 1109  Nambale -Mjini-Mayenje Water 
Project Grant/Credit Number 
08W/Busia/Busia/97 - State 
Department for Water and 
Sanitation  733,000  Expenditure totalling Kshs.733,000 
was not supported  by payment 
vouchers and related documents  
24 1081  Global Fund - To Contribute to 
Achieving Vision 2030 Through 
Universal Access to 
Comprehensive HIV Prevention, 
Treatment and Care Program - 
KEN-H-TNT             NO. 2065  – 
Ministry of Health  612,500  Payments of Kshs.612,500 not in 
cash book and not supported with 
payment vouchers.  
25 1108  Kenya Special Project On BRSM 
and SAICM (Grant/Credit Number:  
Special Programme 2nd Round 
Approval  Project 01)  - State 
Department for Environment and 
Climate Change   461,400  Expenditure on domestic travel and 
subsistence allowance not 
supported with approvals  
26 1065  Establishment of Kenya Advanced 
Institute of Science and 
Technology Project No KEN -4  200,000  Unsupported expenditure on fuel 
and lubricants  
   Total  2,241,794,345    
 
 
Failure to support or provide requisite documents for audit is in breach of Section 62 of 
the Public Audit Act, 2015 which states that a person who without justification, fail s to 
provide information required under th e Act or without justification fail s to provide 53 
 information within reasonable time or submit s false or misleading information com mits an 
offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five million shillings or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or to both.  
 
Further, failure  to support or provide requisite documents  is also contrary to Section 68(1)  
of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012  which states that an  Accounting Officer for 
a national government entity, Parliamentary Service Commission and the Judiciary shall 
be accountable to the National Assembly for ensuring that the resources of the respective 
entity for which he or she is the Accounting Officer ar e used in a way that is (a) lawful 
and authorised; and (b) effective, efficient, economical and transparent. Section 68 (2)(b)  
of the Act requires the Accounting Officer to ensure that the entity keeps financial and 
accounting records that comply with th e Act. 
In addition , failure by the entities to fully support payments casts doubt on the authenticity 
of the reported expenditure. It is also an indication of weak internal controls and 
governance in the affected entities . Similar ly, lack of acco untability could lead to losses, 
wastage and theft of public resources.   
 
 
3.7.4  Stalled/ Delayed Projects  
 
 
The Government has continued to incur huge expenditure on projects which had either 
stalled or had remained incomplete long after their completion dates had elapsed. Some 
of the  stalled projects are attracting penalties due to delays in payment of completi on 
certificates of milestones already achieved, while others have been revised to amounts 
higher than the original contract sum leading to cost escalations. In addition, payments 
have been made to projects which appear to have completely stalled casting do ubt on 
value for money for such expenditure. Some of the entities with stalled and delayed 
projects in respect of donor funded projects are detailed in Appendix  L while stalled and 
delayed projects for MDAs are listed in Table 39 below :  
 
 
Table 39: Stalled/ Delayed  Projects  for MDAs  
 
S/No . Vote  Ministry/Dept ./ 
Agency  Contract 
Amount  
 (Kshs.)  Amount Paid as 
at 30 June , 2023 
(Kshs.)  Description  
1 1021  State Department for 
Interior and Citizen 
Services  764,444,795  36,245,978  Stalled construction of DCC 
office block at Tigania 
Central Meru, construction  
of Tigania East Sub -County 
office block at Muriri, 
construction of Magunga 
District Headquarters Suba 
South Sub -County, 
construction of Nyanza 
South Headquarters and 
construction of staff houses 
at Kenya School of 
Adventure and Leadership 
in Meru County  
2 1109  State Department for 
Water and Sanitation  9,430,012  5,813,700  Stalled borehole project at 
Njiiri School  54 
 S/No . Vote  Ministry/Dept ./ 
Agency  Contract 
Amount  
 (Kshs.)  Amount Paid as 
at 30 June , 2023 
(Kshs.)  Description  
3 1053  State Department for 
Foreign affairs  418,865,923  415,904,556  Stalled project of chancery 
building and High 
Commissioners residence 
in Pakistan  
4 1162  State Department for 
Livestock  8,863,275  - Stalled boundary wall, 
entrance gate, driveway , 
landscape and toilet block at 
AHITI Nyahururu  
5 1032  State Department for 
Devolution  890,829,345  250,000,000  Stalled proposed Africities 
Convention Centre Project 
in Kisumu County  
6 
 1025  
 National Police 
Service  
 105,365,412  - Stalled construction works 
at Laisamis Police Station  
- 38,855,887  Stalled projects at 
Embakasi A Campus  
7 1132  State Department for 
Sports Development  345,766,644  - Stalled Phase 2 
construction at Kirigiti 
Stadium in Kiambu County  
8 1023  State Department for 
Correctional Services  28,812,175  12,846,470  Stalled projects at 
Nyandarua and Machakos 
Prisons  
9 1094  State Department for 
Housing and Urban 
Development  64,000,000  35,000,000  Stalled projects under 
Economic Stimulus Project 
(ESP) - fresh produce 
markets project  
10 1184  State Department for 
Labour and Skills 
Development  556,763,065  339,314,478  Stalled construction of 
National Employment 
Promotion Centre and 
Research Institute Office 
Complex  
11 1064  State Department for 
Technical, Vocational 
Education and 
Training  48,743,504  26,700,000  Stalled collapsed building 
at Chepareria Technical 
Training Institute  
12 2091  Teachers Service 
Commission  122,563,447  - Delayed completion of 
Machakos and Kilifi County 
offices at 33% and 40% 
completion levels 
respectively  
13 1169  State Department for 
Crop Development  178,581,150  24,358,930  Delayed construction of 
Laare Modern Miraa Market 
Shed, Mwendi- Urithi Lailuba 
grain drying and storage 
facility and Mbeu Muungano 
CBO drying and storage 
facility in Meru County, plus 
delayed construction of New 
Progressive Farmers’ 
Cooperative Society drying 
and storage facility in Uasin 
Gishu County  55 
 S/No . Vote  Ministry/Dept ./ 
Agency  Contract 
Amount  
 (Kshs.)  Amount Paid as 
at 30 June , 2023 
(Kshs.)  Description  
14 1021  State Department for 
Interior and Citizen 
Services  230,830,590  120,722,294  Delayed completion of 
Mwea West Sub -County 
Headquarters in Kirinyaga 
County and delayed 
construction of 100 PAX 
hostel block at Kenya 
School of Adventure and 
Leadership in Meru County  
15 1194  State Department for 
Petroleum  76,500,000  - Delayed implementation of 
Mwananchi Gas Project  
16 1109  State Department for 
Water and Sanitation  2,270,070,650  443,681,794  Delayed works and services 
at Upper Kerio Valley and 
Upper Ewaso Nyiro North 
River  water sheds, delayed 
borehole drilling at Muthuini 
Primary School in Kieni 
Constituency, delayed 
completion of Kanyenyaini 
Irrigation Project, delayed 
completion of Sagana River 
Restoration Project and 
delayed completion of 
Maragua Bulk Water Supply 
and Irrigation Project  
17 1095  State Department for 
Public Works  987,189,903  579,635,580  Delayed completion of six 
projects including 
footbridges and County 
Headquarters  
18 1261  The Judiciary  826,329,820  - Delayed completion of 
fifteen (15) projects at 
various court stations for 
over eight (8) years with 
50% to 97% work done  
19 2043  Parliamentary Joint 
Services  - 752,448,996  Delayed completion of 
multi -storey office block, 
started on 1 July , 2014 and 
completion time extended  to                                           
30 Nov ember,  2021  
20 1152  State Department for 
Energy  3,055,985,900  - Delayed implementation of 
the Green Climate Fund 
Project Phase I and II. GoK 
did not provide co-funding of 
Kshs.159,190,619   (EUR 
1,037,140)  
21 1081  State Department for 
Medical Services  2,280,000,000  - Delayed construction of Kisii 
Cancer Centre for over 
seven (7) years  
22 1081  State Department for 
Medical Services  - 131,647,317  Delayed construction of 
Paediatric Emergency 
Centre and Burns 
Management Centre at 
Kenyatta National Hospital  56 
 S/No . Vote  Ministry/Dept ./ 
Agency  Contract 
Amount  
 (Kshs.)  Amount Paid as 
at 30 June , 2023 
(Kshs.)  Description  
23 2031  Independent 
Electoral and 
Boundaries 
Commission  293,504,959  229,929,888  Delayed completion of 
construction and renovation 
of six (6) warehouses in six 
(6) Counties despite lapse 
of the contract periods  
24 1092  State Department for 
Transport  153,129,261  137,044,745  Delayed completion of 
Transport Data Centre 
contract awarded in 2014  
   13,716,569,830  3,100,222,841   
   
There is no value for money on public funds spent on the stalled and delayed projects as 
no services are being provided by these projects. Further, the amount spent is a sunk cost 
as no development has been achieved from the stalled or incomplete projects.  The costs 
incurred further distort expenditures i ncurred on development votes.  
  
3.8  Land Without Ownership Documents  
 
The following MDAs did not have ownership documents for land as detailed in Table 40 
below:  
Table 40: Land Without Ownership Documents  
Vote  Ministry/Dept ./Agency  Description  
1025  National Police Service  The Service does not have ownership documents for 
over 2,400 parcels of land across the Country  
1053  State Department for Foreign 
Affairs  The State Department does not have title document for 
the Kinshasa Chancery land  
1081  Ministry of Health  The Ministry did not have Ownership documents for 
various parcels of land spread across the Country  
1108  State Department for 
Environment and Climate 
Change  The State Department d id not have title documents for 
various parcels of land on which the weather stations 
stand  
1162  State Department for 
Livestock  The State Department did not provide ownership 
documents for 100 acres of land allocated to AHITI 
Nyahururu  
1166  State Department for the 
Blue Economy and Fisheries  The State Department did not provide ownership 
documents for 25 parcels of land  
1174  State Department for Trade  The State Department did not provide ownership 
documents for a parcel of land measuring 7 acres  
1184  State Department for Labour 
and Skills Development  The State Department did not provide ownership 
documents for various parcels of land  
1185  State Department for Social 
Protection and Citizen Affairs  The State Department did not have Ownership 
documents for 36 parcels of land spread across the 
Country  
2031  Independent Electoral and 
Boundaries Commission  The Commission does not have ownership documents 
for various parcels of land spread across the Country  57 
 Vote  Ministry/Dept ./Agency  Description  
2041  Parliamentary Service 
Commission  Ownership documents for the parcels of land for the Main 
Parliament Building, Center for Parliamentary Studies 
and Training, Juvenile Court House, County hall and 
Protection House were not provided  
1023  State Department for 
Correctional Services  Various parcels of land encroached by informal settlers  
1109  Ministry of Water, Sanitation , 
and Irrigation   The Ministry d oes not have ownership documents for 
the land acquired for the construction of Partakilat 
Water Supply Project - Narok County -Kilgoris Sub 
County  
1109  Ministry of Water, Sanitation, 
and Irrigation - Lake Victoria 
South Water Works 
Development Agency   The Project Management d oes not have ownership 
documents for land on which the project for expansion 
of Kericho Water Supply Systems has been  
implemented at a contract sum of Kshs.1,189,805,385  
1109  Ministry of Water, Sanitation, 
and Irrigation - Tana Water 
Works Development Agency   The Project Management for Kenya Towns Sustainable 
Water Supply and Sanitation Programme  had not been 
acquired ownership documents for                                                                                                  
parcels of land valued at Kshs.7,325,775  
 
 
In the absence of title documents, it has not been possible to ascertain that all the 
properties and improvements thereon belong to the respective MDAs. The Ministry of 
Lands and Physical Planning, the National Land Commission and The  National Treasury 
should work together to resolve the issue of public land owned by State Departments and 
other Government entities.  
 
 
3.9 Other Audit Matters  
 
These are matters other than those presented or disclosed in the financial reports that, in 
the auditor's judgement, are relevant to users' understanding of the audit  process , the 
auditor's responsibilities or the auditor's report. These matters may not affect the opinion 
expressed on the financial statements but are important and require to be b rought to the 
attention of users of the audit reports. The significant audit matters are outlined below:  
 
3.9.1  Unresolved Prior Year Audit Issues  
   
3.9.1.1  The audit revealed numerous instances where prior year audit observations had 
not been resolved. Instances were noted where the unresolved prior year issues were not 
disclosed under the progress on follow up of auditor’s recommendations section of the 
financial statements as required by the Public Sector Accounting Standards Board  
(PSASB) . There  were also instances where no supporting evidence was provided  to 
support  how issues were resolved.   
 
3.9.1.2  Further, Section 68(2)(l) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 requires 
an Accounting Officer for a national government entity to take appropriate measures to 
resolve any issues arising from audit which may remain outstanding. In addition, Section 
74(4) the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 states that an Accounting Officer 
engages in improper conduct in relation to a national governmen t entity if the officer 
contravenes or fails to comply with th e Act, including their accounting responsibilities.  
 58 
 3.9.1.3  In addition , Section 53(1) of the Public Audit Act, 2015 requires  an Accounting 
Officer of a State Organ or public entity to within three  months after Parliament has 
considered and made recom mendations on the audit report –  
 
(a) take the relevant steps to implement the recommendations of Parliament on the 
report of the Auditor -General; or  
 
(b) give explanations in writing to  Parliament on why the report has not been acted 
upon.  
 
 
3.9.1.4  Further, Section 53(2) of the Public Audit Act, 2015 states that failure to comply 
with the provisions of Section 53 (1), the Accounting Officer shall be in contempt of 
Parliament or County Assembly and upon de termination by Parliament or relevant County 
Assembly, Parliament or relevant County Assembly may recommend administrative 
sanctions such as removal as the Accounting Officer, reduction in rank among others. 
Failure to resolve audit issues may res ult in loss of public funds where the issues involve 
irregular use of public resources.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.0 Compliance and Governance  Issues    
4.1   I carried out compliance audits by assessing whether the National Government  
entities complied with laws, regulations, policies and guidelines regulating public 
spending when incurring expenditure for the year ended 30 June, 202 3. I also evaluated 
whether the public realized value for money in the management and use of public 
resources. Further, I evaluated the effectiveness of the governance structure s, risk 
management and internal controls implemented by National Government entities for 
orderly, efficient and effective operations.  
 
 
4.2 The following are some of the weaknesses revealed by the compliance audits : 
   
i. Non-Compliance with the One -Third of Basic Salary Rule  
 
During the year under review, five thousand four hundred and seventy -one (5,471) 
employees in the National Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies earned a 
net salary less than one -third (⅓)  of their basic salary. This was contrary to Section19(3) 
of the Employment Act, 2007 which states that all deductions made by an employer from 
the wages or salaries of his employees at any one time shall not exceed two thirds of 
such wages or salaries. Th e details are indicated  in the Table 41 below;  
 
Table  41: MDAs Affected by One -Third of Basic Salary Rule  
S/No.  Vote  Ministry, Department or Agency  Number 
of Staff 
Affected  
1. 1071  The National Treasury  155 
2. 1023  State Department for Correctional  Services  4,082  
3. 1064  State Department for Technical, Vocational Education and 
Training  215 
4. 1066  State Department for Early Learning and Basic Education  83 
5. 1081  Ministry of Health  168 
6. 1091  State Department for Roads  131 59 
 S/No.  Vote  Ministry, Department or Agency  Number 
of Staff 
Affected  
7. 1094  State Department for Housing and Urban Development  45 
8. 1109  State Department for Water and Sanitation  19 
9. 1112  State Department for Lands and Physical Planning  165 
10. 1123  State Department for Broadcasting and Telecommunications  14 
11. 1185  State Department for Social Protection and Senior Citizen Affairs  126 
12. 1252  State Law Office and Department of Justice  162 
13. 1291  Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions  75 
14. 2021  National Land Commission  19 
15. 2071  Public Service Commission  12 
  Total  5,471  
 
Management of the various Ministries, Departments and Agencies have not provided 
explanations on failure to comply with the law.  
 
 
 
 
ii. Non-Compliance with the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 
and the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Regulations, 2020    
 
 
      The main issues include the following:  
 
 
• Failure to provide contract and tender documents for audit review  
 
• Irregular procurements and use of non -competitive procurement practices     
 
• Irregular variations and termination s of contracts  
 
• Stalled /incomplete  projects  
 
• Abuse of low -value procurement method  
 
• Failure to implement e-Procurement  
 
iii. Value for Money Issues  
 
• Delays in completion  of projects  
• Unapproved over expenditures  
 
• Idle cash in bank accounts  
 
• Lease of unutilized office space  
 
• Unauthorized allowances  
 
iv. Other Compliance and Governance Issues  
 
• Payment of allowances not approved by Salaries and Remuneration               
Commission  (SRC)  
 
• Processing of salar ies outside Integrated Personnel and Payroll Database (IPPD)  
 
 60 
 • Unbudgeted expenditure s 
 
• Irregular allowances  
 
• Lack of or poorly maintained fixed assets registers  
 
• Incurr ence of avoidable nugatory expenditure e.g. fines, penalties and interests  
 
• Ineffective Internal Audit Function and Audit Committees  
   
• Non-establishment of IT Strategic Committees  
 
• Late submission of Financial Statements  for audit  
 
 
• Non-compliance with affirmative action on gender, and regional distribution  in 
employment  
 
• Unapproved positions in Staff Establishment  
• Non-remittance of statutory deductions  including PAYE, VAT,  NHIF, NSSF and                
Pensions  
 
• Irregular issuance of multiple imprests  
 
• Non-adherence to one- third basic salary rule  
 
• Failure to develop requisite policy documents 
 
• Failure to collect government revenue  
 
• Failure to surrender unspent balances  
 
• Delay s and overpayment s of cash transfers  for social security and protection  
 
5.0 The Equalisation Fund     
  
 
5.1 Article 204(1) of the Constitution of Kenya establishes the Equalisation Fund. It further 
requires that one-half per cent (0.5%) of all the revenue collected by the National 
Government each year, calculated on the basis of the most recent audited accounts of 
revenue received as approved by the National Assembly, be paid into the Fund. The 
purpose of the Equalisation  Fund is to provide basic services including water, roads, 
health facilities and electricity to marginalised areas, to bring the quality of the services in 
those arears to the level generally enjoyed by the rest of the nation.  
  
5.2 The Commission on  Revenu e Allocation (CRA) developed the policy for identifying 
marginali sed areas and sharing of the Equalisation Fund as mandated by Article 216(4) 
of the Constitution. The policy identified fourteen (14) Counties namely: Turkana, 
Mandera, Wajir, Marsabit, Sambu ru, West Pokot, Tana River, Narok, Kwale, Garrisa, 
Kilifi, Taita Taveta, Isiolo and Lamu as beneficiaries of the Fund.   
  
5.3  The total accumulated entitlement to the Fund for the financial years 2011/2012 to 
2022/2023 is Kshs.51,586,214,050 as at 30 June, 2 023 as indicated in Table 42 below:  
 
 61 
 Table 42: Total Accumulated Entitlement – Equalisation Fund  
Financial Year  Base Year  for Most 
Recent Audited Revenues 
Approved by the National 
Assembly  Approved Audited   
Revenue   
(Kshs.)  Equalisation Fund 
Entitlement   
(Kshs.)   
2011/2012  2008/2009  468,151,970,000  2,340,759,850  
2012/2013  2009/2010  529,300,000,000  2,646,500,000  
2013/2014  2009/2010  529,300,000,000  2,646,500,000  
2014/2015  2012/2013  776,900,000,000  3,884,500,000  
2015/2016  2012/2013  776,900,000,000  3,884,500,000  
2016/2017  2012/2013  776,900,000,000  3,884,500,000  
2017/2018   2012/2013  776,900,000,000  3,884,500,000  
2018/2019  2012/2013  776,900,000,000  3,884,500,000  
2019/2020  2012/2013  776,900,000,000  3,884,500,000  
2020/2021  2016/2017  1,357,698,000,000  6,788,490,000  
2021/2022  2016/2017  1,357,698,000,000  6,788,490,000  
2022/2023  2017/2018  1,413,694,840,000  7,068, 474,200  
Total   10,317,242,810,000  51,586,214,050  
  
 
5.4 Review of the financial statements for the Equalisation Fund for the year ended                        
30 June, 2023 revealed  that only an amount of Kshs.12,400,000,000 or 24% out of the 
expected Kshs. 51,586,214,050  of the total entitlement had been transfe rred to the 
Equalisation Fund Account. The National Treasury  had not remitted the remaining 
balance of Kshs. 39,186,214,050  to the Fund as at 30 June, 202 3 and was, therefore, in 
breach of the Constitution.  
 
5.5  In addition, out of the Kshs.12,400,000,000 transferred  to the Fund Account, only 
Kshs .10,763,152,142 or 87% had  been disbursed for the approved projects, through the 
parent Ministries to the identified Counties, leaving a balance of Kshs. 1,636,847,858  still 
held in the Fund Account s as at 30 June, 202 3. 
    
 
5.6 Comparison between the total entitlement of Kshs.51,586,214,050 and the disbursed 
amount of Kshs.10,763,152,142 represents a dismal overall performance of 21% for the 
twelve  (12) years since  the inception of the Fund. Management has indicated that the 
Equalisation Fund Appropriation Bill,  2022 was prepared and submitted to the National 
Assembly to authorise the  disbursements of funds due to the Equalisation Fund including 
the allocation s for 2021/2022 and 2022/2023 financial years. However, the Bill  had not 
been passed by Parliament as at the time  of the audit.  
 
5.7 The Equalisation Fund will lapse in twenty (20) years since inception, after which it 
will cease if no extensio n is approved by Parliament as provided by Article 204 (6) and (7) 
of the Constitution. Given the low level of disbursements as indicated above, the country 
is not likely to achieve the objectives of the Equalisation  Fund, which is  to improve the 
quality of requisite services in the marginali sed areas within the set timelines, as 
envisaged by the Constitution .62 
 APPENDICES  
 
 Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
1. State Department for Economic Planning  
 2. The Executive Office of the President  
3. The Office of the Deputy President  
4. Office of the Prime Cabinet Secretary  
5. State Department for Interior and Citizen Services  
 6. State Department for Correctional Services  
7. State Department for Immigration and Citizen Services  
 8. National Police Service  
 9. State Department for Internal Security and National Administration  
10. State Department for Development of the Arid and Semi -Arid Lands  
11. Ministry of Defence  
12. State Department for Diaspora Affairs  
13. State Department  for Post Training and Skills Development  
14. State Department for Roads  
15. State Department for Shipping and Maritime Affairs  
16. State Department for Housing and Urban Development  
17. State Department for Irrigation  
18. State Department for Information Communication Technology and Digital 
Economy  
19. State Department for Broadcasting and Telecommunications  
20. State Department for Co -operatives  
21. State Department for Trade  
 63 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
22. State Department for Investment Promotion  
23. State Department for Labour and Skills Development  
24. State Department for Tourism  
25. State Department for Wildlife  
26. State Department for Gender and Affirmative Action  
27. State Department for Public Service  
28. State Department for Youth Affairs  
29. State Department for East African Community  
30. The State Department for Regional and Northern Corridor Development  
31. Ethics and Anti -Corruption Commission  
32. National Intelligence Service  
33. Office of the Registrar of Political Parties  
34. Witness Protection Agency   
35. State Department for Forestry  
36. Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR)  
37. Parliamentary Service Commission  
38. The National Assembly  
39. Parliamentary Joint Services  
40. Judicial Service Commission  
41. Commission on Revenue Allocation  
42. Public Service Commission  
43. Salaries and Remuneration Commission  
44. Teachers Service Commission  64 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
45. National Police Service Commission  
46. Office of the Controller of Budget  
47. National Gender and Equality Commission  
48. Independent Policing Oversight Authority  
49. National Exchequer Account – The National Treasury  
50. Consolidated Fund Services - Public Debt – The National Treasury  
51. Development Receiver of Revenue Statements - The National Treasury  
52. East Africa Tourist VISA Fee Collection Account - The National Treasury  
53. Consolidated Fund Services - Salaries, Allowances and Miscellaneous Services 
- The National Treasury  
54. Revenue Statements of the Pensions Department - The National Treasury  
55. National Cohesion and Integration Commission  
56. Receiver of Revenue Statements - Ministry of Defence  
57. Receiver of Revenue - Revenue Statements - State Department for Lands and 
Physical Planning  
58. Business Registration Service  
59. Receiver of Revenue Statements - The Judiciary  
60. Ethics and Anti -Corruption Commission Staff House Mortgage and Car Loan 
Scheme  
61. Business Registration Service - Official Receiver  
62. Office of the Registrar of Political Parties Staff Mortgage and Car Loan Scheme   
63. Witness Protection Agency Staff Housing Mortgage Scheme Fund  
64. Witness Protection Agency Staff Motor Car Loan Scheme Fund  
65. Kenya National Commission on Human Rights Car and Mortgage Loan Scheme  
66. National Land Commission Housing Scheme Fund - National Land Commission  65 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
67. National Land Commission Staff Car Loan Scheme Fund  
68. Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission Staff Mortgage and Car 
Loan Scheme  
69. Commission on Revenue Allocation Staff Mortgage Scheme Fund  
70. Commission on Revenue Allocation Staff Car Loan Scheme Fund  
71. Salaries and Remuneration Commission Mortgage and Car Loan Scheme  
72. National Police Service Commission Staff Car Loan and Mortgage Scheme 
Fund  
73. Office of the Controller of Budget Staff Mortgage Scheme  
74. Commission on Administrative Justice Staff Mortgage and Car Loan Fund  
75. Independent Policing Oversight Authority Staff Mortgage and Car Loan Scheme  
76. Public Debt Management Support Project (PDMS) - ADB Grant Agreement 
No.5500155013708 - The National Treasury  
77. Micro Finance Sector Support Credit Project (Credit No. CKE 3004 01E and 
CKE 6010 01E - The National Treasury  
78. National Treasury Capacity  Strengthening Project (Grant No.5500155013902 
ID NO.P -KE-KOO -011) -  The National Treasury  
79. Infrastructure Finance and Public Private Partnerships Project - Additional 
Financing (IDA Credit No.6121 -KE) - The National Treasury  
80. Supporting Access to Finance & Enterprise Recovery Project (IDA Credit No. 
7018 -KE) - The National Treasury  
81. Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK FINFA) (IFAD Loan No. 
2000004121 and Loan No. 2000004122) - The National Treasury  
82. Global Fund - To Ensure Provisio n of Quality Care and Prevention Services for 
All People in Kenya with TB, Leprosy and Lung Diseases Program - KEN-T-
TNT, GA 2067 - The National Treasury  
83. Global Fund - To Contribute to Achieving Vision 2030 Through Universal Access 
to Comprehensive HIV Prevention, Treatment and Care Program - KEN-H-TNT, 
GA 2065 - The National Treasury  66 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
84. Infrastructure Finance and Public Private Partnerships Project - IDA Credit 
No.5157 -KE - The National Treasury  
85. Global Fund - To Reduce Malaria Incidence and Deaths by at Least 75 Percent 
of the 2016 Levels by 2023, Working Towards a Malaria Free Kenya Program 
KEN-M-TNT, GA 2064 - The National Treasury  
86. Affordable Housing Finance Project (IDA Credit No.8958 -KE) - The National 
Treasury 
87. Public Financial Management Reforms Program (Credit Nos. DANIDA FY06, 
SIDA 51110081, IDA GESDEK -6133 -KE, AFD/CKE 1130 & PASEDE CRIS 
No:041 -658) - The National Treasury  
88. Technical Support Programme (Financing Agreements No. 
KE/FED/2009/021421, No. KE/FED/023 -733 and No.  KE/FED/037 -941) - The 
National Treasury  
89. Programme for Rural Outreach of Financial Innovations and Technologies 
(PROFIT) (IFAD Loan No.814 -KE and Grant No.1218 -KE) - The National 
Treasury 
90. Financial Sector Support Project (IDA Credit No.56270 -KE) - The National 
Treasury 
91. Financing Locally -Led Climate Action Program No.P173065; Credit No. IDA 
6980 -KE; Grant Agreement No. TF0B6810; Loan Agreement BMZ - No.2016 65 
108/2018 65 138 - The National Treasury  
92. Eastern Africa Regional Transport, Trade and Development Facilitation Project 
IDA Credit No. 5638 -KE - Kenya Revenue Authority  
93. Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project (IDA Credit No. 6768) - Kenya 
Revenue Authority  
94. Coordination of Population Policy Implementation Project (UNFPA -KEN09POP) 
- National Council for Population and Development  
95. National Information Platform for Food Security and Nutrition Project 
(Food/2017/393 -022) - Kenya National Bureau of Statistics  
96. UNICEF - Kenya Generation Unlimited (GENU) Project (Programme 
No.2400/A0/A6 - Executive Office of the President  67 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
97. Kenya - EU Partnership for the Implementation of the National Strategy to 
Counter Violent Extremism in Kenya - National Counter Terrorism Centre  
98. Technical Assistance to Enhance the Capacity of the President's Delivery Unit 
(ADB Grant No. 5500155012902) - State Department for Internal Security and 
National Administration  
99. Kenya Cooperation and Partnership Facility (KCPF) Project NO.KE/FED 
2019/041 -712, Credit NO.FED/2021/423 -175 - State Department for Devolution  
 
 
 100 Kenya Symbiocity Programme - SIDA No.51110060 - Council of Governors  
101. Kenya Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project (KDRDIP) IDA 
Credit No.6021 -KE and Grant No. TFOA 7762 -KE - Ministry of East African 
Community (EAC), ASALs and Regional Development  
102. Promotion of Youth Employment and Vocational Training in Kenya (Phase I) 
Reference: Loan No. BMZ 2016 67, 211 & BMZ No. 2016 65 298 and Project 
Grant Reference: No. 1930 05 527 - State Departmen t for Technical, Vocational 
Education and Training  
103. Support to the State Department for Technical, Vocational Education and 
Training for Relevant Skills Development Project - TVET Project Phase II (ADF 
Loan No.2100150033295) - State Department for Technical, Vocational 
Education and Training  
104. Promotion of Youth Employment and Vocational Training in Kenya (Phase II) 
Loan No. BMZ 2018 65 120 - The State Department of Technical, Vocational 
Education and Training  
105. East Africa Skills for Transf ormation and Regional Integration Project 
(EASTRIP) IDA Loan Credit No.6334 -KE - Ministry of Education - State 
Department for Technical, Vocational Education and Training  
106. East Africa Skills Transformation and Regional Integration Project (EASTRIP) 
Grant/Credit No. IDA 6334 -KE - Kisumu National Polytechnic  
107. Africa Center of Excellence in Sustainable Use of Insects as Food and Feeds 
Project (IDA Credit No. 5798 -KE) - Jaramogi Oginga Odinga University of 
Science and Technology  
108. Africa Centre of Excellence (ACE II) in Phytochemicals, Textiles and Renewable 
Energy (PTRE) Project (IDA Credit No.5798 -KE) - Moi University  68 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
109. Kenya Rural Transformation Centers Digital Platform Project - Cooperative 
University of Kenya  
110. Transforming Health Systems for Universal Care (THS -UC) Project Grant IDA 
Credit No.5836 - KE, TFOA2561, TFOA2792 and CR. P152394 - Ministry of 
Health  
111. Resilient Sustainable Systems for Health (RSSH) KEN -T-TNT 2067 Sub -
Recipient - Ministry of Health  
112. East Africa's Centre of Excellence for Skills and Tertiary Education in 
Biomedical Sciences - Phase 1 (Loan No.2100150031997) Project - Ministry of 
Health  
113. Support of the Health Care Financing Strategy - Reproductive Health - Output 
Based Approach Project (Credit BMZ No. Kenya 201065853) - Ministry of 
Health  
114. Global Fund Tuberculosis Grant Credit No. KEN -T-TNT-2067 - Ministry of 
Health  
115. East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking (EAPHLN) Project Credit WB 
KE-4732 - Kenya Medical Supplies Authority  
116. A Case Study on Integrated Delivery of Selected Non -Communicable Diseases 
in Kenya (PHGF Grant No. TFOA5636) - Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital  
117. Global Fund HIV/AIDS Project Grant Number KEN -H-TNT-2065 - National 
Syndemic Diseases Control Counc il 
118. Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project Credit Number 6768 -KE - State 
Department for Roads  
119. Eastern Africa Regional Transport, Trade and Development Facilitation Project 
Credit No.5638 -KE IDA - State Department for Roads  
120. East Africa Skills Transformation and Regional Integration Project IDA Credit 
No.6334 -KE - State Department for Roads  
121. Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project Loan No.6768 -KE - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  
122. Nuno -Modogashe Road Project - Kenya Nationa l Highways Authority  69 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
123. Kenol -Sagana -Marua Highway Improvement Project (P -KE-DBO -037) Credit 
Nos.5050200000901 and 200020000 - Kenya National Highways Authority  
124. Kenya Transport Sector Support Project (Credit No.4926 KE and No.5410 KE) 
- Kenya National Highways Authority  
125. Port Reitz/Moi International Airport Access (C110) Road (FIDIC 
EPC/TURNKEY Based) Project - Kenya National Highways Authority  
126. Nairobi Southern Bypass Road Project - Loan Agreement No.China Exim Bank 
PBC No.(2011)32 Total No.(183) No. 14203030520112115528 - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  
127 EPC/TURNKEY Construction of Five Footbridges and T -Mall Flyover on 
Mombasa and Langata Roads Project Loan Credit No. KEN -01001 -19 and 
KEN-02001 -19 - Kenya National Highways Authority  
128. Timboroa -Eldoret Road Rehabilitation Project No. P -KE-DBO -019 (Loan 
No.2100150023344) - Kenya National Highways Authority  
129. Samatar -Wajir Road Project (Loan No.13451P, 13/779 and 995) - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  
130. Kenya - South Sudan Link Road Project (REF. No. 2020 62 065 and BMZ                     
No. 2020 83 939) - Kenya National Highways Authority  
131. Arusha -Namanga -Athi River Road Development Project No. P -Z1-DBO -040 - 
Kenya National Highways Authority  
132. Multinational Arusha -Holili/Taveta -Voi Road Corridor Development Project 
Phase I - Loan No.2100150028894 - Kenya National Highways Authority  
133. Merille - Marsabit Road Rehabilitation Project (KE/001/09) Loan Agreement 
No.KE/FED/2009/021 -655 - Kenya Nati onal Highways Authority  
134. Mombasa Gate Bridge Construction Project (I) Loan Agreement No.KE -P34 - 
Kenya National Highways Authority  
135. Nairobi - Thika Highway Improvement Project Lot 3 Government Concessional 
Loan Agreement No. (2009) 39 Total No. (290) - Kenya National Highways 
Authority  
136. AFD - Asal Rural Roads Project - Kenya Rural Roads Authority  70 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
137. The Establishment of Bus Rapid Transit Line 5 Project (EDCF Loan Agreement 
No.KEN -5) - Kenya Urban Roads Authority  
138. Nairobi Outering Road Improvement Project - Kenya Urban Roads Authority  
139. Nairobi Intelligent Transportation System Establishment and Junctions 
Improvement Project Phase I (EDCF Loan Agreement No.KEN -6) - Kenya 
Urban Roads Authority  
140. Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project Loan No.6768 -KE - State 
Department for Transport  
141. National Urban Transport Improvement Project Credit No.5140 -KE - Kenya 
Railways Corporation  
142. Safe Roads/Usalama Barabarani Credit Number KE/FED/37 -778 - National 
Transport and Safety Authority  
143. Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project (IDA Credit No.6768 KE) - 
National Transport and Safety Authority  
144. Kenya Informal Settlement Improvement Project No. P113542 Credit                          
No. 4873KE - State Department for Housing and Urban Development  
145. Nairobi Metropolitan Services Improvement Project (IDA Credit No.5102 -KE) - 
State Department for Housing and Urban Development  
146. Second Informal Settlement Improvement Project No. P167814 Credit                       
No. 6759KE - State Department for Housing and Urban Development  
147. Kisumu Urban Project (Project Advance Account) - CKE 1035.01.G - County 
Government of Kisumu  
148. Kisumu Urban Project (Cash Expenditure Fund) - CKE 1035.01.G - County 
Government of Kisumu  
149. Rwabura Irrigation Development Project - National Irrigation Authority  
150. Bura Rehabilitation Development Project - National Irrigation Authority  
151. Mwea Irrigation Development Project - Loan Agreement No. KE -P27 - National  
Irrigation Authority  
152. Kenya Gold Mercury Free ASGM Project Number GEF/UNDP/GOK -00108253 
- Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Forestry  71 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
153. National Action Plan on Artisanal Small - Scale Gold Mining Project 
(No.AFR/NAP ASGM Project/C/10 -2016) - Ministry of Environment, Climate 
Change and Forestry  
154. Strengthening Drought Resilience for Small Holder Farmers and Pastoralists in 
the IGAD Region Project No. 03/DRESS -EA/07/0SS -KE/20 - Ministry of 
Environment, Climate Change and  Forestry  
155. NEMA -GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support: NEMA Capacity 
Strengthening Programme Towards Accessing Climate Finance from Green 
Climate Fund - Credit Number KEN -RS-003 
156. Africa Environmental Health and Pollution Management Project (EHPMP) - 
National Environment Management Authority  
157. Green Growth and Employment Thematic Programme - National Environment 
Management Authority  
158. Integrated Programme to Build Resilience to Climate Change and Adaptive 
Capacity of Vulnerable Communities in Kenya - National Environment 
Management Authority  
159. Thwake Multi -Purpose Development Program Phase 1 (AfDB Loan 
No.2100150029993, 2000200003351, AGTF No.5050200000501 and AfDB 
Grant No.2100155025973) - State Department for Water and Sani tation  
160. Water and Sanitation Development Project (IDA Credit No.6029/6030 -KE) - 
State Department for Water and Sanitation  
161. Kenya Water Security and Climate Resilience Project (Grant No. TFOA0761A 
and Credit No.5268/5674 -KE) - State Department for  Water and Sanitation  
162. Coastal Region Water Security and Climate Resilience Project Credit No. 5543 -
KE/70040 -KE - State Department for Water and Sanitation  
163. Kenya Italy Debt for Development Programme - State Department for Water and 
Sanitation  
164. Upper Tana Catchment Natural Resource Management Project IFAD Loan No. 
1-867-KE; IFAD Additional Financing Loan No. 2000002597 -KE; and Spanish 
Trust Fund Loan No. I -E-8-KE - Ministry of Water, Sanitation and Irrigation  72 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
165. Improvement of Drinking Wa ter and Sanitation Systems in Mombasa: Mwache 
Project (Credit No. AFD Loan No.CKE 1103 01 C) - Coast Water Works 
Development Agency 
166. Nairobi Inclusive Sanitation Improvement Project - Grant No. 5600155005153 - 
Athi Water Works Development Agency  
167. Busia -Port Victoria Household Sanitation Project Grant/Credit 
No.02HS/LVNWWDA/BUSIA/054 - Busia Water and Sewerage Services 
Company Limited  
168. Nairobi Rivers Basin Rehabilitation and Restoration Program: Sewerage 
Improvement Project II (AfDB Loan No. 2000200003407 and ADF Loan No. 
2100150040550) - Athi Water Works Development Agency  
169. Nairobi Sanitation Output Based Aid (OBA) Project IDA Grant No. TF014251 
and No. TF0A5607) - Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company Limited  
170. Nairobi Water Distribution Network Project (Credit BMZ No.2020.82.527/KV 
26833) - Athi Water Works Development Agency  
171. Support to Water and Sanitation Services in Peri -Urban Area (Loan No. BMZ 
2013.6543.6 - Athi Water Works Development Agency  
172. Kenya Towns Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation Program CR.NO. P -KE-
E00-011 (AFDB Loan No.2000200000501) - Central Rift Valley Water Works 
Development Agency 
173. Kenya Towns Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation Programme (AfDB 
Loan No.2000200000501) - Tana Water Works Development Agency  
174. Kenya Towns Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation Program - Credit No.P -
KE-E00-011 (AfDB Loan No.200200000501) - Athi Water Works Development 
Agency 
175. Water and Sanitation Services Improvement Project (IDA CR. No.5103 -KE) - 
Lake Victoria North Water Works Development Agency  
176. Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project IDA - P161305 Credit No. 6768 - 
KE - Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Authority  
177. Kenya Off Grid Solar Access Project (KOSAP -SNV) Credit Number 6135 -KE - 
State Department for Energy  73 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
178. Kenya Off -Grid Solar Access Project (KOSAP) Credit Number 6135 -KE - State 
Department for Energy  
179. Kenya Electricity Modernization Project (KEMP) (IDA CR NO.5587 KE) - State 
Department for Energy  
 180. Multi -National Kenyan Section of Interconnection of Electric Grids of Nile 
Equatorial Lake Countries Project Credit Number 2100150022643 -KE - Kenya 
Electricity Transmission Company Limited (KETRACO)  
181. Multinational Kenya -Tanzania Power Interconnnection Project (Kenyan 
Component) (ADF Loan No. 2100150032846) - Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  
182. Last Mile Connectivity Project I Loan No.2100150032195 - Kenya Power and 
Lighting Company PLC  
183. Last Mile Connectivity Project II Loan No.2000200000152 - The Kenya Power 
and Lighting Company PLC  
184. Eastern Electricity Highway Project (IDA Credit No. 5148 -KE; AFD Loan No: 
CKE 1030 01B and ADF Loan No: 2100150027845 - Kenya Electricity 
Transmission Compa ny Limited  
185. Rural Electrification in Five Regions Project (Credit No.11/597KE, Credit 
No.1407PKE) - Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Corporation  
186. Olkaria -Lessos -Kisumu Transmission Lines Construction Project (JICA Loan 
No. KE -P28) - Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited  
187. 220KV and 132KV Transmission Lines and Substations (Exim Bank of India 
Funded) Projects - Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited  
188. Ethiopia - Kenya Electricity Highway Project (ADB Loan No. 2000200003502 - 
Mariakani Substation Project ID No: P -ZI-FA0-162) - Kenya Electricity 
Transmission Company Limited  
189. Kenya Electricity Modernization Project (IDA Credit No. 5587 -KE) - Rural 
Electrification and Renewable Energy Corporation  
190. Nairobi  Ring Transmission Line Project (AFD Credit No. CKE 6012.01, AFD 
Credit No. CKE 1068 01, AFD Credit No. CKE 1030.01B, EIB Credit No. 
25.367/KE and GoK) - Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited  74 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
191. Power Transmission System Improvement Project Credit Number 
2100150023752 - Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited  
192. Kenya Off -Grid Solar Access Project for Underserved Counties (IDA 
Cr.No.6135 -KE) - Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Corporation  
193. Kenya Electricity Expansion Project (OFID Credit No.1487P) - Rural 
Electrification and Renewable Energy Corporation  
194. Bogoria Silali Geothermal Project (Loan No.2013.66.103) - Geothermal 
Development Company Limited  
195. Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in 
Kenya's Arid and Semi -Arid Rangelands (IUCN Grant No. P02886) - State 
Department for Livestock  
196. Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (Loan Number 2000003565 and 
2000003566) – State Department for Livestock Development  
197. De-Risking, Inclusion & Value Enhancement of Pastoral Economies (DRIVE) 
Project (Credit No:7139 -KE) - State Department for Livestock Development  
198. Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio -Economic Development Project Credit No. 
65400 -KE - State Department for  Blue Economy and Fisheries  
199. Aquaculture Business Development Programme (IFAD Loan No.2000002052 & 
2000002614) - State Department for Blue Economy and Fisheries  
200. Enable Youth Kenya Program (ADF Loan No.2100150038895) - State 
Department for Crop Development  
201. Multi -national Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Programme 
(DRSLP) in the Horn of Africa (ADF Loan No.2100150028345) - State 
Department for Crop Development  
202. Multi -national Rural Livelihoods Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa (RLACC) (ADB/ADF Grant No.5550155001201) - State Department for 
Crop Development  
203. Supporting Agricultural Input and Output Marketing Policy and Regulatory 
Reforms to Improve the Enabling Business Environment for Agriculture in Ke nya 
(AGRA Grant Number 2018 KE 005) - State Department for Crop Development  75 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
204. National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (IDA Credit No. 5900 -
KE) - State Department for Crop Development  
205. Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme -Climate Resilient Agricultural 
Livelihood Window (KCEP -CRAL) EU Grant No.2000000623, Grant 
No.2000001522, Grant No.2000003493, Grant No.2000001122 and IFAD Loan 
2000001121 - State Department for Crop Development  
206. Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project (IDA Credit No.5945 -KE - State 
Department for Crop Development  
207. National Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (Credit No. IDA -7064 -
KE) - State Department for Crop Development  
208. Capacity Development Project for Enhancement of Rice Production in Irrigation 
Schemes in Kenya (Project Number 1161001009) - Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock Development, State Department for Crop Development  
209. Small -Scale Irrigation and Value Addition Project - ADF Loan 
No.2000130014530 and Grant No.557015500075 1 - State Department for Crop 
Development  
210. Agricultural Sector Development Support Programme II (SIDA Grant 
No:51110109) - State Department for Crop Development  
211. Emergency Locust Response Project (IDA Credit No. 6648 -KE and No. 70530 -
KE) – State Department for Crop Development  
212. Build Resilience for Food and Nutrition Security in the Horn of Africa 
(BREFONS) Credit Number: 2100150042746 - State Department for Crop 
Development  
213. Centre of Excellence in Sustainable Agriculture and Agribusiness Management 
Credit No.5798 -KE - Egerton University  
214. Kenya Industry and Entrepreneurship Project (Credit No. IDA 6268 -KE) - State 
Department for Industrialization  
215. Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities Project (Credit No. IDA 5812 -KE) 
- Micro and Small Enterprises Authority (MSEA)  
216. Kenya Youth Employment Opportunities Project - 58120 -KE - State Department 
for Labour and Skills Development  76 
  Appendix A: Unmodified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
217. Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities Project Credit Number: IDA -5812 -
KE - National Industrial Training Authority (NITA)  
218. Kenya Social and Economic Inclusion Project Credit Number: 6348 -KE - State 
Department for Social Protection and Senior Citizen Affairs   
219. Kenya Social and Economic Inclusion Project No. P164654 IDA Credit No. 
62480KE and Grant No. TF0A9527 - National Drought Management Authority  
220. Combating Poaching and Illegal Wildlife Trafficking in Kenya Through an 
Integrated Approach (Grant No.00108406) - State Department for Wildlife  
221. Women Empowerment for Gender Equality Project - Grant No.PA002836RD - 
State Department for Gender and Affirmative Action  
222. Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities Project (IDA Credit No. 5812 - KE) 
- State Department for Youth Affairs  
223. Youth Empowerment Programme Grant N. B4210 - State Department for Youth 
Affairs  
224. Judicial Performance Improvement Project (IDA Credit No. 5181 -KE) - The 
Judiciary 
225. Green Zones Development Support Project Phase II (Credit No.P.KE -AAD-005) 
- Kenya Forest Service  
226. Increased Enjoyment of Human Rights & Fundamental Freedoms by All in 
Kenya Project Number:KEN 2062, KEN 19 -0011, KNCHR - Kenya National 
Commission on Human Rights  
227. Kenya Primary Education Equity in Learning Program Credit Number 7067 -KE 
- Teachers Ser vice Commission  
228. Secondary Education Quality Improvement Project (IDA Credit No.6138 -KE) - 
Teachers Service Commission  
 
 
 
 77 
  Appendix B: Qualified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
1. The National Treasury  
2. State Department for Devolution  
3. Ministry of Foreign Affairs  
4. State Department for Foreign Affairs  
5. State Department for Technical, Vocational Education and Training  
6. State Department for Higher Education and Research  
7. State Department for Early Learning and Basic Education  
8. State Department for Implementation of Curriculum Reforms  
9. Ministry of Health  
10. State Department for Public Health and Professional Standards  
11. State Department for Transport  
12. State Department for Public Works  
13. State Department for Environment and Climate Change  
14. State Department for Water and Sanitation  
15. State Department for Lands and Physical Planning  
16. State Department for Sports and the Arts  
17. State Department for Culture and Heritage  
18. State Department for Energy  
19. State Department for Livestock Development  
20. State Department for the Blue Economy and Fisheries  
21. State Department for Crop Development  
22. State Department for Industry  
23. State Department for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
Development  78 
  Appendix B: Qualified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
24. State Department for Social Protection and Senior Citizen Affairs  
25. State Department for Mining  
26. State Department for Petroleum  
27. State Law Office and Department of Justice  
28. The Judiciary  
29. Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions  
30. National Land Commission  
31. Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission  
32. The Commission on Administrative Justice  
33. Receiver of Revenue  - Recurrent – The National Treasury  
34. Government Investments and Public Enterprises - Revenue Statements - The 
National Treasury  
35. Consolidated Fund Services - Pension and Gratuities - The National Treasury  
36. Revenue Statements - State Department for Interior and Citizen Services  
37. Revenue Statements - State Department for Blue Economy and Fisheries  
38. Receiver of Revenue - Revenue Statements - State Department for Mining  
39. Revenue Statements of Receiver of Revenue - State Law Office and 
Department of Justice  
40. Revenue Statements of the Business Registration Service  
41. Public Trustee of Kenya  
42. Judiciary Mortgage Scheme  
43. Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions Staff Housing Mortgage and Car 
Loan Scheme  
44. Study and Capacity Building Fund Project (Grant Numbers CKE 6015 01K, CKE 
1043 01F and CKE 1047 01K) - The National Treasury  79 
  Appendix B: Qualified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
45. Kenya Italy Debt for Development Program - State Department for Vocational 
and Technical Training  
46. Support to Technical and Vocational Education Training and Entrepreneurship 
(TVETE Project Phase III) (Loan No. 2100150042254) - State Department for 
Technical, Vocational Education and Training  
 47. East Africa Skills for Transformation and Regional Integration Project 
(EASTRIP) (IDA Loan No.6334 -KE) - Meru National Polytechnic  
48. East Africa Skills Transformation and Regional Integration Project (Credit 
Number 6334 -KE) - Kenya Coast National Polytechnic (KCNP)  
49. Support to Enhancement of Quality and Relevance in Higher Education, 
Science and Technology Project Credit No. 2100150027993 - State Department 
for Higher Education and Research  
50. Establishment of Kenya Advanced Institute of Science and Technology Project 
No. KEN -4 - Ministry of Education - State Department for Higher Education and 
Research  
51. Eastern and Southern Higher Education Centres of Excellence (ACE II) Project 
(Credit No.5798 -KE) - State Department of Higher Education and Research  
52. USAID Boresha Jamii Project No. (72061521CA00004) - Jaramogi Oginga 
Odinga  University of Science and Technology  
53. GOK/UNICEF Education for Young People Programme - State Department for 
Early Learning and Basic Education  
54. Secondary Education Quality Improvement Project (Credit No.61380 -KE) - 
State Department for Basic Educ ation  
55. Kenya Primary Education Equity in Learning Project IDA Grant No. D991 -KE 
and Credit No.7067 -KE - State Department for Basic Education  
56. COVID -19 Health Emergency Response Project Grant/Credit No.6598 -KE - 
Ministry of Health 
57. DANIDA Primary Healthcare (PHC) Support Program - Ministry of Health  
58. Global Fund - To Reduce Malaria Incidence and Deaths by at Least 75 Percent 
of the 2016 Levels by 2023, Working Towards a Malaria - Free Kenya - KEN-
M-TNT, No.2064 - Ministry of Health  80 
  Appendix B: Qualified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
59. Global Fund - To Contribute to Achieving Vision 2030 Through Universal Access 
to Comprehensive HIV Prevention, Treatment and Care Program -KEN-H-TNT 
No.2065 - Ministry of Health  
60. Kenya Health Sector Programme Support III (DANIDA Ref.104.Kenya.810.300 -
Grant) – County Government of Kisii  
61. Mombasa Special Economic Zone Development Project (1) - Kenya National 
Highways Authority  
62. Upgrading of "Gilgil Machinery" Road Project - Kenya Rural Roads Authority  
63. Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project IDA Credit No. 3930 -KE and 
4571 -KE - Kenya National Highways Authority  
64. Mombasa Port Area Road Development Project Loan No. KE - P29 & KE P32 - 
Kenya National Highways Authority  
65. Mombasa -Nairobi -Addis Ababa Road Corridor Development Project: 
(Isiolo/Merille/Moyale Road) - Kenya National Highways Authority  
66. Mombasa -Nairobi -Addis Ababa Road Corridor Project Phase III (Turbi -Moyale) 
No.P -ZI-DB0-095 Loan No.21001500255546 - Kenya National Highways 
Authority  
67. Mombasa -Nairobi -Addis Ababa Road Corridor Project Phase II (Marsabit -Turbi 
Road) ID NO. P -Z1-DB0-027 - Kenya National Highways Authority  
68. Nairobi Western Bypass Project - Kenya National Highways Authority  
69. Eastern Africa Regional Transport, Trade and Development Facilitation Project 
- (IDA CR -5638) - Kenya National Highways Authority  
70. Nairobi -Thika Highway Improvement Project Lot I and II (Credit 
No.2100150015544) - Kenya National Highways Authority  
71. Kapchorwa -Suam -Kitale and Eldoret Bypass Roads Project (Kenya) ID NO. P -
Z1-DBO -183 - Kenya National Highways Authority  
72. Northern Corridor Rehabilitation Programme -Phase III - Kenya National 
Highways Authority 
73. Upgrading of Kibwezi -Mutomo -Kitui-Migwani Road Project No. BLA2016K001 - 
Kenya National Highways Authority  81 
  Appendix B: Qualified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
74. National Urban Transport Improvement Project -IDA Credit No.5140 - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  
75. Bagamoyo - Horo Horo - Lunga Lunga - Malindi Road Project (Phase I)                        
ID No:PZI -DBO -129 - Kenya National Highways Authority  
76. Mombasa -Mariakani Highway Project (A109) Road Lot 1: (Mombasa - Kwa 
Jomvu) - Kenya National Highways Authority  
77. Dualling of Magongo Road (A109L): Phase II (FIDIC EPC/TURNKEY Based) - 
Kenya National Highways Authority  
78. Sirari  Corridor Accessibility and Road Safety Improvement Project: Isebania – 
Kisii – Ahero (A1) Road Rehabilitation - Kenya National Highways Authority  
79. Regional Mombasa Port Access Road Project (Loan No. (Kfw): 27459, Grant 
No. (Kfw): 202061919) and Credit  No. (Kfw): 84010 - Kenya National Highways 
Authority  
80. East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (IDA Credit No.4148 -KE) - 
Kenya National Highways Authority  
81. Support to Road Sector Policy: 10th EDF Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project in 
Kenya No.KE/FED/023 -571 - Kenya Rural Roads Authority  
82. Roads 2000 Phase Two - Central Kenya Rural Roads Improvement and 
Maintenance Project (AFD Credit No. CKE 101201B, Credit No. CKE 104601J 
and Credit No. CKE 109401M - Kenya Rural Roads Authority  
83. Improvement of Rural Roads and Market Infrastructure in Western Kenya 
Project Credit No.BMZ 2007 -65 123 (KFW) - Kenya Rural Roads Authority  
84. Multinational Lake Victoria Maritime Communications and Transport (MLVMCT) 
Project - Kenya Maritime Authori ty 
85. Kenya Urban Support Program (IDA Credit No.61340 KE) - State Department 
for Housing and Urban Development  
86. SC Reporting Tool Kit Project - Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and 
Forestry  
87. Integrated Health and Environment Observatories  and Legal and Institutional 
Strengthening for the Sound Management of Chemicals in Africa 
(NO.AFR/CHEMOBS PROJECT/C/07 -2017) - State Department for 
Environment and Climate Change  82 
  Appendix B: Qualified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
88. Kenya Special Project on BRSM and SAICM (Grant/Credit Number: Special 
Programme 2nd Round Approval Project 01) - State Department of Environment 
and Climate Change 
89. Green Growth and Employment Thematic Programme (GGETP) - State 
Department for Environment and Climate Change  
90. Kenya Enabling Activities for HFC Phase -Down  Project (Grant 
No.UNEP/KEN/SEV/81/TAS/01+) - Ministry of Environment, Climate Change 
and Forestry  
91. Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase III (LVEMP) Project 
Preparatory Advance No. V1570 - KE - Ministry of Environment and Forestry  
92. System for Land -Based Emissions Estimation in Kenya (SLEEK) - Ministry of 
Environment, Climate Change and Forestry  
93. Kenya Institutional Strengthening Project Phase XII (Project Number: 
KEN/SEV/86/INS/64) - Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Forestry  
94. GCF Project Preparation Facility: "Devolved Climate Change Governance to 
Strengthen Resilience of Communities in Target Counties" (Project No.KEN -
PPF-010) - National Environment Management Authority  
95. Kenya Water Towers Project (Grant No. FED/2016/375 -958) - Kenya Forest 
Service  
96. Nairobi Water and Sanitation Project (Credit No. CKE113501H) - Athi Water 
Works Development Agency  
97. Nambale -Mjini-Mayenje Water Project Grant/Credit Number 
08W/BUSIA/BUSIA/97  
98. Lake Victoria Water Supply  and Sanitation Programme Phase II Project No. P -
ZI-EAO -004 (ADF Grant No.2100155019967) - Lake Victoria South Water 
Works Development Agency  
99. Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation Project Grant No. CKE 1093 02 M, Credit 
No. CKE1093 01 L and EIB No. FI No 83890 Serapis No  2011 -0619 - Lake 
Victoria South Water Works Development Agency  
100. Water Sector Development Programme - Lake Victoria South (Kericho, Kisii, 
Nyamira and Litein) Loan No. BMZ 2010 65 861 and Grant No. BMZ 2010 70 
457 - Lake Victoria South Water Works Development Agency  83 
  Appendix B: Qualified Opinion  
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
101. Kisii Water Supply and Sanitation Project - ORIO11/KE/21 - Lake Victoria South 
Water Works Development Agency  
102. Trilateral Development Cooperation in Kenya, Water and Sanitation Sector 
Project (Credit No. BMZ 201365352) - Lake Victoria South Water Works 
Development Agency 
103. Northern Collector Phase 1 – Additional Rehabilitation and Development of the 
Network Project (Credit Number CKE -1074) - Athi Water Works Development 
Agency 
104. Eastern Africa Regional  Transport, Trade and Development Facilitation Project 
IDA Credit No. 5638 -KE (MICT) - Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) Authority  
105. 50MW Solar Power Plant in Garissa Project (GCL No. 2015(10) - Rural 
Electrification and Renewable Energy Corporation  
106. Menengai Geothermal Project Agreement NO.CKE 1038.01K - Geothermal 
Development Company Limited  
107. Revitalising Irish Potato Production for COVID -19 Affected Small - Scale 
Producers Project (IFAD Grants No. 2000003589 and 200000396600) - 
Agriculture and Food Authority  
108. Vijana Vuka na Afya Programme Grant No. 201367465 - State Department for 
Youth Affairs  
109. Programme for Legal Empowerment and Aid Delivery (Project Credit Number 
KE/FED/2018/397 -591) - Office of the Attorney General and Department of 
Justice  
 
 
 
 
 
 84 
  Appendix C: Adverse Opinion  
 
 
NO. MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAS)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECTS  
1. E-Citizen Revenue Accountability Statement - The National Treasury  
2. Sound Chemicals Management Mainstreaming and UPOPS Reduction in 
Kenya Project No.P00099820 - Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and 
Forestry  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 85 
  Appendix D:  Disclaimer of Opinion  
 
 
NO. MINISTRY, DEPARTMENT AND AGENCY (MDA)/DONOR FUNDED 
PROJECT  
1. Statement of Outstanding Obligations Guaranteed by the Government of                
Kenya - The National Treasury  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 86 
 Appendix E: Additional Funds Granted through Supplementary Budget  
 
Vote  Ministry, Department, Agency  Amount  
(Kshs.)  
1194  Ministry of Petroleum and Mining    41,840,683,440  
1025  National Police Service    25,180,089,940  
1066  State Department for Early Learning and Basic Education   24,140,737,401  
1173  State Department for Cooperatives    20,698,194,787  
  Guaranteed Debt    13,839,609,061  
1011  Executive Office of the President    11,977,047,079  
1035  State Department for Development of the ASAL    10,385,655,470  
1026  State Dep artment for Internal Security  and National 
Administration      8,845,935,362  
1169  State De partment for Crop Development and Agricultural 
Research      7,912,979,738  
1041  Ministry of Defence      7,297,534,074  
1083  State Department for Public Health and Professional 
Standards      5,212,715,604  
1053  State Department for Foreign Affairs      5,196,322,860  
1185  State Department for Social Protec tion, Senior Citizens 
Affairs and Special Programs      3,569,843,843  
1332  State Department for Forestry      3,008,939,205  
1261  The Judiciary      2,835,000,000  
1104  State Department for Irrigation      2,581,505,302  
1072  State Department for Planning      2,296,193,099  
1177  State Department for Investment Promotion      2,213,879,964  
1222  State Department for Regional and Northern Corridor 
Development      2,065,943,781  
1024  State Department for Immigration and Citizen Services      2,013,833,564  
2091  Teachers Service Commission           1,821,393,998  
1203  State Department for Wildlife      1,746,627,543  
1162  State Department for Livestock.      1,570,174,021  
1092  State Department for Transport      1,520,434,524  
1202  State Department for Tourism      1,085,304,840  
1012  Office of the Deputy President      1,016,850,072  
1013  Office of the Prime Cabinet Secretary         853,205,101  
  Pensions and Gratuities         811,269,230  
1054  State Department for Diaspora Affairs         658,000,000  
1176  State Department for Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises  Development         633,620,281  
2043  Parliamentary Joint Services              535,000,000  
1252  State Law Office and Department of Justice         412,017,064  
1192  State Department for Mining         368,804,850  87 
 Vote  Ministry, Department, Agency  Amount  
(Kshs.)  
1291  Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions         355,535,429  
2052  Judicial Service Commission              300,000,000  
1174  State Department for Trade and Enterprise Development         216,611,817  
2041  Parliamentary Service Commission              165,000,000  
1134  State Department for Culture and Heritage           66,147,797  
1032  Ministry of Devolution           65,684,123  
2061  The Commission on Revenue Allocation              48,859,211  
1221  State Department for East African Community             8,800,000  
 Total  217,371,983,475  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 88 
 Appendix F: Pending Bills - Donor Funded Projects 
 
No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
1.  Kenya Transport Sector Support 
Project (Credit No.4926 KE and 
No.5410 KE)  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  6,925,616,718  
2.  Mombasa Port Area Road 
Development Project Loan No. KE - 
P29 & KE P32  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  6,863,882,873  
3.  National Urban Transport Improvement 
Project -IDA Credit No.5140   Kenya National Highways 
Authority  6,251,148,679  
4.  Nairobi Southern Bypass Road Project 
- Loan Agreement No.  China Exim Bank 
PBC No.(2011)32 Total No.(183)                 
No. 14203030520112115528  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  3,623,386,920  
5.  Northern Corridor Transport 
Improvement Project IDA Credit           
No. 3930 -KE and 4571 -KE  Kenya National Highways  
Authority  3,597,877,130  
6.  Upgrading of Kibwezi -Mutomo -Kitui-
Migwani Road Project                        No. 
BLA2016K001  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  3,384,415,397  
7.  Sirari Corridor Accessibility and Road 
Safety Improvement Project: Isebania – 
Kisii – Ahero (A1) Road Rehabilitation   Kenya National Highways 
Authority  3,341,354,966  
8.  Kenol -Sagana -Marua Highway 
Improvement Project (P -KE-DBO -037) 
Credit Nos.5050200000901 and 
200020000  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  3,193,335,011  
9.  Bagamoyo - Horo Horo - Lunga Lunga - 
Malindi Road Project (Phase I) ID 
No:PZI -DBO -129  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  3,183,107,062  
10.  Mombasa -Mariakani Highway Project 
(A109) Road Lot 1: (Mombasa - Kwa 
Jomvu)  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  2,225,743,167  
11.  Nairobi Western Bypass Project  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  1,691,209,482  
12.  Dualling of Magongo Road (A109L): 
Phase II (FIDIC EPC/TURNKEY 
Based)  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  1,640,595,404  
13.  Nairobi Rivers Basin Rehabilitation and 
Restoration Program: Sewerage 
Improvement Project II (AfDB Loan                
No. 2000200003407 and ADF Loan       
No. 2100150040550)  Athi Water Works Development 
Agency  1,600,038,379  
14.  Olkaria -Lessos -Kisumu Transmission 
Lines Construction Project (JICA Loan 
No. KE -P28)  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  1,177,239,110  89 
 No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
15.  Global Fund - To Contribute to 
Achieving Vision 2030 Through 
Universal Access to Comprehensive 
HIV Prevention, Treatment and Care 
Program - KEN-H-TNT, GA 2065  The National Treasury  1,063,280,388  
16.  Regional Mombasa Port Access Road 
Project (Loan No. (Kfw): 27459, Grant 
No. (Kfw): 202061919) and Credit No. 
(Kfw): 84010  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  978,541,404  
17.  Nairobi Outering Road Improvement 
Project  Kenya Urban Roads Authority  846,198,623  
18.  Eastern Africa Regional Transport, 
Trade and Development Facilitation 
Project - (IDA CR -5638)  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  838,328,644  
19.  Port Reitz/Moi International Airport 
Access (C110) Road (FIDIC 
EPC/TURNKEY Based) Project  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  822,548,139  
20.  Mwea Irrigation Development Project - 
Loan Agreement No. KE -P27  National Irrigation Authority  803,087,704  
21.  Kapchorwa -Suam -Kitale  and Eldoret 
Bypass Roads Project (Kenya) ID NO. 
P-Z1-DBO -183  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  745,168,259  
22.  Multinational Kenya -Tanzania Power 
Interconnection Project (Kenyan 
Component) (ADF Loan                                   
No. 2100150032846)  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  700,157,734  
23.  Kenya Towns Sustainable Water 
Supply and Sanitation Programme 
(AfDB Loan No.2000200000501)  Tana Water Works 
Development Agency  657,914,335  
24.  Thwake Multi -Purpose Development 
Program Phase 1 (AfDB Loan 
No.2100150029993, 2000200003351, 
AGTF No.5050200000501 and AfDB 
Grant No.2100155025973)  State Department for Water 
and Sanitation  623,084,955  
25.  Nuno -Modogashe Road Project  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  609,968,478  
26.  Eastern Electricity Highway Project 
(IDA Credit No. 5148 -KE; AFD Loan 
No: CKE 1030 01B and ADF Loan                  
No: 2100150027845  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  597,773,725  
27.  Kenya Towns Sustainable Water 
Supply and Sanitation Program - Credit 
No.P -KE-E00-011 (AfDB Loan 
No.200200000501)  Athi Water Works Development 
Agency  568,868,751  
28.  Nairobi - Thika Highway Improvement 
Project Lot 3 Government Concessional Kenya National Highways 
Authority  550,671,327  90 
 No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
Loan Agreement No.  (2009) 39 Total 
No. (290)  
29.  East Africa Skills for Transformation 
and Regional Integration Project 
(EASTRIP) (IDA Loan No.6334 -KE)  Meru National Polytechnic  514,346,567  
30.  Menengai Geothermal Project 
Agreement NO.CKE 1038.01K  Geothermal Development 
Company Limited  509,425,000  
31.  Kenya Towns Sustainable Water 
Supply and Sanitation Program CR.NO. 
P-KE-E00-011 (AFDB Loan 
No.2000200000501)  Central Rift Valley Water Works 
Development Agency  449,975,282  
32.  Bura Rehabilitation Development 
Project  National Irrigation Authority  439,646,657  
33.  Nairobi -Thika Highway Improvement 
Project Lot I and II (Credit 
No.2100150015544)  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  436,511,076  
34.  Power Transmission System 
Improvement Project Credit Number 
2100150023752  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  379,000,868  
35.  Multi -National Kenyan Section of 
Interconnection of Electric Grids of Nile 
Equatorial Lake Countries Project 
Credit Number 2100150022643 -KE  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited (KETRACO) 328,717,613  
36.  Upgrading of "Gilgil Machinery" Road 
Project  Kenya Rural Roads Authority  317,673,816  
37.  Ethiopia - Kenya Electricity Highway 
Project (ADB Loan No. 2000200003502 
- Mariakani Substation Project ID                   
No: P-ZI-FA0-162)  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  296,731,355  
 
38.  Nairobi Ring Transmission Line Project 
(AFD Credit No. CKE 6012.01, AFD 
Credit No. CKE 1068 01, AFD Credit 
No. CKE 1030.01B, EIB Credit                        
No. 25.367/KE and GoK)  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  264,740,058  
39.  Integrated Programme to Build 
Resilience to Climate Change and 
Adaptive Capacity of Vulnerable 
Communities in Kenya  National Environment 
Management Authority  195,278,374  
40.  Rwabura Irrigation Development 
Project  National Irrigation Authority  186,824,079  
 
41.  Global Fund - To Ensure Provision of 
Quality Care and Prevention Services 
for All People in Kenya with TB, Leprosy 
and Lung Diseases Program - KEN-T-
TNT, GA 2067  The National Treasury  176,406,228  
42.  Last Mile Connectivity Project II Loan 
No.2000200000152  The Kenya Power and Lighting 
Company PLC  174,151,000  91 
 No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
43.  Kenya Electricity Modernization Project 
(IDA Credit No. 5587 -KE)  Rural Electrification and 
Renewable Energy Corporation  173,874,192  
44.  Lake Victoria Water Supply and 
Sanitation Programme Phase II Project 
No. P -ZI-EAO -004 (ADF Grant 
No.2100155019967)  Lake Victoria South Water 
Works Development Agency  140,187,852  
45.  Rural Electrification in Five Regions 
Project (Credit No.11/597KE, Credit 
No.1407PKE)  Rural Electrification and 
Renewable Energy Corporation  132,925,013  
46.  220KV and 132KV Transmission Lines 
and Substations (Exim Bank of India 
Funded) Projects  Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited  127,681,620  
47.  Support to Water and Sanitation 
Services in Peri -Urban Area (Loan No. 
BMZ 2013.6543.6  Athi Water Works Development 
Agency  126,998,204  
48.  Financing Locally -Led Climate Action 
Program No.P173065; Credit No. IDA 
6980- KE; Grant Agreement                            
No. TF0B6810; Loan Agreement BMZ - 
No.2016 65 108/2018 65 138  The National Treasury  125,428,927  
49.  Last Mile Connectivity Project I Loan 
No.2100150032195  Kenya Power and Lighting 
Company PLC  89,063,528  
50.  Arusha -Namanga -Athi River Road 
Development Project No. P -Z1-DBO -
040  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  83,344,955  
51.  Kenya Electricity Modernization Project 
(KEMP) (IDA CR NO.5587 KE)  State Department for Energy  74,035,202  
52.  East Africa Trade and Transport 
Facilitation Project (IDA Credit 
No.4148 -KE)  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  70,867,529  
53.  Merille - Marsabit Road Rehabilitation 
Project (KE/001/09) Loan Agreement 
No.KE/FED/2009/021 -655   Kenya National Highways 
Authority  69,056,118  
54.  Improvement of Rural Roads and 
Market Infrastructure in Western Kenya 
Project Credit No.BMZ 2007 -65 123 
(KFW)  Kenya Rural Roads Authority  66,288,310  
55.  Nairobi Inclusive Sanitation 
Improvement Project - Grant                                 
No. 5600155005153  Athi Water Works Development 
Agency  66,018,716  
56.  Mombasa -Nairobi -Addis Ababa Road 
Corridor Project Phase II (Marsabit -
Turbi Road) ID NO. P -Z1-DB0-027   Kenya National Highways 
Authority  62,165,683  
57.  Nairobi Metropolitan Services 
Improvement Project (IDA Credit 
No.5102 -KE)  State Department for Housing 
and Urban Development  60,853,925  92 
 No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
58.  Northern Corridor Rehabilitation 
Programme -Phase III  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  54,792,831  
59.  Global Fund - To Reduce Malaria 
Incidence and Deaths by at Least 75 
Percent of the 2016 Levels by 2023, 
Working Towards a Malaria Free Kenya 
Program KEN -M-TNT, GA 2064  The National Treasury  53,030,140  
60.  Global Fund - To Reduce Malaria 
Incidence and Deaths by at Least 75 
Percent of the 2016 Levels by 2023, 
Working Towards a Malaria - Free 
Kenya - KEN-M-TNT, No.2064   Ministry of Health  48,444,000  
61.  Secondary Education Quality 
Improvement Project (IDA Credit 
No.6138 -KE)  Teachers Service Commission  47,306,255  
62.  Public Financial Management Reforms 
Program (Credit Nos. DANIDA FY06, 
SIDA 51110081, IDA GESDEK -6133-
KE, AFD/CKE 1130 & PASEDE CRIS 
No:041 -658)   The National Treasury  38,510,295  
63.  Support to Road Sector Policy: 10th 
EDF Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project 
in Kenya No.KE/FED/023 -571  Kenya Rural Roads Authority  33,504,172  
64.  Kenya Youth Employment and 
Opportunities Project (IDA Credit                     
No. 5812 - KE)  State Department for Youth 
Affairs  26,091,836  
65.  Global Fund - To Contribute to 
Achieving Vision 2030 Through 
Universal Access to Comprehensive 
HIV Prevention, Treatment and Care 
Program -KEN-H-TNT No.2065  Ministry of Health  24,398,008  
66.  Multinational Arusha -Holili/Taveta -Voi 
Road Corridor Development Project 
Phase I - Loan No.2100150028894  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  21,807,516  
67.  Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation 
Project Grant No. CKE 1093 02 M, 
Credit No. CKE1093 01 L and EIB No. 
FI No 83890 Serapis No  2011 -0619 -  Lake Victoria South Water 
Works Development Agency  19,924,752  
68.  Agricultural Sector Development 
Support Programme II (SIDA Grant 
No:51110109)  State Department for Crop 
Development  19,874,610  
69.  Kenya Youth Employment and 
Opportunities Project (Credit No. IDA 
5812 -KE)  Micro and Small Enterprises 
Authority (MSEA)  18,202,738  
70.  Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: 
Ecosystem Based Adaptation in State Department for Livestock  15,669,870  93 
 No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
Kenya's Arid and Semi -Arid 
Rangelands (IUCN Grant No. P02886)  
71.  The Establishment of Bus Rapid Transit 
Line 5 Project (EDCF Loan Agreement 
No.KEN -5)  Kenya Urban Roads Authority  14,807,013  
72.  Lake Victoria Environmental 
Management Project Phase III 
(LVEMP) Project Preparatory Advance 
No. V1570 - KE   Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry  13,858,198  
73.  Enable Youth Kenya Program (ADF 
Loan No.2100150038895)  State Department for Crop 
Development  13,748,170  
74.  Kenya - South Sudan Link Road Project 
(REF. No. 2020 62 065 and BMZ                     
No. 2020 83 939)  Kenya  National Highways 
Authority  12,988,543  
75.  Eastern Africa Regional Transport, 
Trade and Development Facilitation 
Project IDA Credit No. 5638 -KE   Kenya Revenue Authority  12,459,000  
 
76.  Kenya Urban Support Program (IDA 
Credit No.61340 KE)  State Department for Housing 
and Urban Development  11,682,114  
77.  Mombasa -Nairobi -Addis  Ababa Road 
Corridor Project Phase III (Turbi -
Moyale) No.P -ZI-DB0-095 Loan 
No.21001500255546  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  11,539,155  
78.  Aquaculture Business Development 
Programme (IFAD Loan 
No.2000002052 & 2000002614)  State Department for Blue 
Economy and Fisheries  11,436,184  
79.  Improvement of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation Systems in Mombasa: 
Mwache Project (Credit No. AFD Loan 
No.CKE 1103 01 C)  Coast Water Works 
Development Agency  10,248,815  
80.  Financial Sector Support Project (IDA 
Credit No.56270 -KE)  The National Treasury  10,024,584  
81.  Kenya Youth Employment and 
Opportunities Project Credit Number: 
IDA-5812 -KE  National Industrial Training 
Authority (NITA)  9,526,965  
82.  Kenya Livestock Commercialization 
Project (Loan Number 2000003565 and 
2000003566)  State Department for Livestock 
Development  8,082,961  
83.  EPC/TURNKEY Construction of Five 
Footbridges and T -Mall Flyover on 
Mombasa and Langata Roads Project 
Loan Credit No. KEN -01001- 19 and 
KEN-02001 -19  Kenya National Highways 
Authority  7,499,380  
84.  Kenya Rural Transformation Centers 
Digital Platform Project  Cooperative University of 
Kenya  7,347,444  94 
 No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
85.  Kenya Social and Economic Inclusion 
Project Credit Number: 6348 -KE  State Department for Social 
Protection and Senior Citizen 
Affairs   6,935,510  
86.  Strengthening Drought Resilience for 
Small Holder Farmers and Pastoralists 
in the IGAD Region Project                              
No. 03/DRESS -EA/07/0SS -KE/20  Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change and Forestry  6,917,900  
87.  Resilient Sustainable Systems for 
Health (RSSH) KEN -T-TNT 2067 Sub -
Recipient  Ministry of Health  6,450,831  
88.  Global Fund Tuberculosis Grant Credit 
No. KEN -T-TNT-2067  Ministry of Health  5,519,439  
89.  Support of the Health Care Financing 
Strategy - Reproductive Health - Output 
Based Approach Project (Credit BMZ 
No. Kenya 201065853)   Ministry of Health  4,436,435  
90.  National Urban Transport Improvement 
Project Credit No.5140 -KE  Kenya Railways Corporation  3,900,000  
91.  Transforming Health Systems for 
Universal Care (THS -UC) Project Grant 
IDA Credit No.5836 - KE, TFOA2561, 
TFOA2792 and CR. P152394  Ministry of Health  3,628,545  
92.  Combating Poaching and Illegal Wildlife 
Trafficking in Kenya Through an 
Integrated Approach (Grant 
No.00108406)  State Department for Wildlife  3,011,650  
93.  Global Fund HIV/AIDS Project Grant 
Number KEN -H-TNT-2065  National Syndemic Diseases 
Control Council  3,000,684  
94.  Eastern and Southern Higher Education 
Centres of Excellence (ACE II) Project 
(Credit No.5798 -KE)  State Department for Higher 
Education and Research  2,995,920  
95.  Nairobi Water Distribution Network 
Project  (Credit BMZ 
No.2020.82.527/KV 26833)  Athi Water Works Development 
Agency  2,415,254  
96.  USAID Boresha Jamii Project               
No. (72061521CA00004)  Jaramogi Oginga Odinga 
University of Science and 
Technology  2,379,246  
97.  A Case Study on Integrated Delivery of 
Selected Non -Communicable Diseases 
in Kenya (PHGF Grant No. TFOA5636)  Moi Teaching and Referral 
Hospital  2,318,966  
98.  Kenya Off Grid Solar Access Project 
(KOSAP -SNV) Credit Number 6135 -KE  State Department for Energy  1,750,848  
99.  Affordable Housing Finance Project 
(IDA Credit No.8958 -KE)  The National Treasury  1,672,770  
100.  Africa Centre of Excellence (ACE II) in 
Phytochemicals, Textiles and Moi University  1,425,443  95 
 No. Donor Funded Project  Implementing Entity  Pending Bills  
(Kshs.)  
Renewable Energy (PTRE) Project 
(IDA Credit No.5798 -KE)  
101.  Nairobi Intelligent Transportation 
System Establishment and Junctions 
Improvement Project Phase I (EDCF 
Loan Agreement No.KEN -6)  Kenya Urban Roads Authority  1,246,242  
102.  Infrastructure Finance and Public 
Private Partnerships Project - Additional 
Financing (IDA Credit No.6121 -KE)  The National Treasury  995,300  
103.  Bogoria Silali Geothermal Project (Loan 
No.2013.66.103)  Geothermal Development 
Company Limited  438,200  
104.  Kenya Gold Mercury Free ASGM 
Project Number GEF/UNDP/GOK -
00108253  Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change and Forestry  212,700  
105.  Women Empowerment for Gender 
Equality Project - Grant 
No.PA002836RD  State Department for Gender 
and Affirmative Action  180,000  
106.  Kenya Primary Education Equity in 
Learning Program Credit Number          
7067 -KE  Teachers Service Commission  173,538  
107.  East Africa's Centre of Excellence for 
Skills and Tertiary Education in 
Biomedical Sciences - Phase 1 (Loan 
No.2100150031997) Project  Ministry of Health  135,000  
108.  Kenya Symbiocity Programme - SIDA 
No.51110060  Council of Governors  125,810  
 Total   65,881,832,291  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 96 
 Appendix  G: Low Absorption of Funds/Undrawn Balances  
S/No . Donor 
Funded 
Project  Project 
Start Date  Project  
End Date  Total Project 
Amount  
(Kshs.)  Amount 
Utilised  
(Kshs.)  Undrawn 
Amount  
(Kshs.)   
% of  
Absor ption  
1.  National  
Treasury 
Capacity 
Strengthening 
Project (Grant 
No.550015501
3902 Id No.P -
KE-KOO-011) 
- The National 
Treasury  12.02.2021  31.03.2024  62,890,000  11,787,824  51,102,176  19 
2.  Promotion of 
Youth 
Employment 
and Vocational 
Training in 
Kenya (Phase 
II) Loan No. 
BMZ 2018 65 
120 - State 
Department 
for Technical, 
Vocational 
Education and 
Training  30.12.2020  30.12.2024  1,380,000,000  0 1,380,000,000  0 
3.  Green Zones 
Development 
Support  
Project Phase 
II (Credit 
No.P.Ke -AAD -
005) - Kenya 
Forest Service    4,999,742,000,  1,900,989,676  3,098,752,324  38 
4.  Ethiopia - 
Kenya 
Electricity 
Highway  
Project (ADB 
Loan 
No.200020000
3502 - 
Mariakani 
Substation 
Project Id                     
No: P -Zifa0 -
162) - Kenya 
Electricity 
Transmission 
Company 
Limited  June, 2019  December, 
2023  4,064,995,682  1,847,850,354  1,870,633,910  45 
5.  Public  Debt 
Management 
Support  
Project 
(PDMS) - ADB 
Grant  May,  2024  122,080,000  54,502,690  67,577,310  45 97 
 S/No . Donor 
Funded 
Project  Project 
Start Date  Project  
End Date  Total Project 
Amount  
(Kshs.)  Amount 
Utilised  
(Kshs.)  Undrawn 
Amount  
(Kshs.)   
% of  
Absor ption  
Agreement 
No.550015501
3708 - The 
National 
Treasury  
6.  Kenya 
Electricity 
Modernization 
Project (IDA 
Credit No. 
5587-KE) – 
Rural 
Electrification 
and 
Renewable 
Energy 
Corporation   30.06.2023  1,013,000,000  571,887,939  441,112,061  56 
7.  UNICEF - 
Kenya 
Generation 
Unlimited 
(Genu) Project 
(Programme 
No.2400/A0/A
6) - Executive 
Office of the 
President  30.06.2020  30.06.2022  31,600,000  26,195,316  5,404,684  83 
8.  East Africa 
Skills for 
Transformatio
n and Regional 
Integration 
Project 
(EASTRIP) 
(IDA Loan No. 
6334-KE) - 
Meru  National 
Polytechnic   December, 
2024.  1,242,791,640,  454,444,631  788,347,010.  37 
9.  East Africa’s 
Centre of 
Excellence for 
Skills and 
Tertiary  
Education in 
Biomedical 
Sciences - 
Phase 1 (Loan 
No.210015003
1997) Project -  
Ministry of 
Health   31.12.2023  3,674,000,000  2,561,814,494  1,112,185,506  70 
10.  Transforming 
Health 
Systems for 
Universal Care 
(THS -UC) 
Project Grant 
Ida Credit 15.09.2016  30.09.2023  19,684,400,000  18,369,511,838  1,314,888,162  93 98 
 S/No . Donor 
Funded 
Project  Project 
Start Date  Project  
End Date  Total Project 
Amount  
(Kshs.)  Amount 
Utilised  
(Kshs.)  Undrawn 
Amount  
(Kshs.)   
% of  
Absor ption  
No.5836 - KE, 
Tfoa2561, 
Tfoa2792 and 
Cr. P152394 -  
Ministry of 
Health  
11.  Resilient 
Sustainable 
Systems for 
Health (RSSH) 
Ken-T-TNT 
2067 Sub -
Recipient -  
Ministry of 
Health  2021/2022   2023/2024  1,073,372,973  397,645,363  675,727,610  63 
12.  Danida  
Primary 
Healthcare 
(PHC) Support 
Program -  
Ministry of 
Health        
13.  Eastern Africa 
Regional 
Transport,  
Trade  and 
Development 
Facilitation 
Project Credit 
No.5638 -Ke 
IDA - State 
Department for 
Roads  June, 2015   31.12.2023  1,937,387,202  1,288,802,895  648,584,307  67 
14.  East Africa 
Skills 
Transformatio
n and Regional 
Integration 
Project Ida 
Credit 
No.6334 -Ke -  
State  
Department for 
Technical, 
Vocational 
Education and 
Training  2018  2024  1,086,168,320  368,031,532  718,136,788  34 
 
 
 
 
 99 
 Appendix  H: Failure to Close Projects and Idle Funds/Bank Balances  
S/No  Project  Start Date  End Date  Idle 
Balances  
(Kshs.)  Remarks  
1.  Technical  Support 
Programme  (Financing  
Agreements  
No.KE/FED/2009/021421,   
NO. KE/FED/023- 733 and         
NO.KE/FED/037 -941)                     
- Consolidated  Fund 
Services – Pension and 
Gratuities  01.03.2012  24.04.2021  22,823,152   The Project had not 
been closed.  Had 
an active bank 
account held in a 
local        bank with                            
a balance of 
Kshs.22,823,152.  
 No explanation was  
provided for the 
failure to close the 
project.  
2.  Micro Finance Sector 
Support Credit Project 
(Credit  NO. CKE 3004 01E 
AND CKE 6010 01E) - 
Consolidated Fund Services 
– Pension and Gratuities  31.10.2010  31.12.2014   The project has not 
been closed eight                           
(8) years after lapse 
of the financing 
agreement.  
3.  Support of the Health Care 
Financing Strategy - 
Reproductive  Health - 
Output Based Approach 
Project  (Credit BMZ NO. 
KENYA  201065853) – 
Ministry of Health     The project incurred 
bank            charges 
amounting               to 
Kshs.34,587 
because of failure to 
close the project.  
4.  Mombasa -Nairobi -Addis 
Ababa Road Corridor 
Project Phase III                       
(Turbi -Moyale)  NO.P -ZI-
DB0-095 LOAN 
NO.21001500255546  - 
Kenya National Highways 
Authority  12.10.2012  15.10.2016   Project closure 
report had not been 
prepared and 
submitted for review 
eight (8) years after 
the lapse of the 
financing 
agreement.  
5.  Nairobi -Thika Highway 
Improvement Project Lot I 
and II (Credit 
NO.2100150015544) - 
Kenya National Highways 
Authority   22.07.2015   The project closure 
report was not 
provided for audit 
more than eight (8) 
years after the 
lapse of the 
financing 
agreement.  
6.  Port Reitz/Moi International        
Airport Access (C110) Road 
(FIDIC EPC /TURNKEY 
BASED) Project - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  26.11.2010  31.10.2015   Project closure 
report was not 
provided for audit 
review eight (8) 
years after the 
lapse of the c losure 
date.  
7.  East Africa Trade and 
Transport Facilitation  30.09.2015   The Project closure 
report was not 100 
 S/No  Project  Start Date  End Date  Idle 
Balances  
(Kshs.)  Remarks  
Project (IDA Credit 
No.4148 -KE) - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  provided for audit, 
eight (8) years after 
the expiry of the 
closure date.  
8.  Mombasa -Nairobi -Addis  
Ababa Road Corridor 
Development Project: 
(Isiolo/Merille/Moyale Road) 
- Kenya National Highways 
Authority  04.02.2005  31.12.2010   The project closure 
report had not been 
prepared and 
submitted for audit 
thirteen (13) years 
after the la pse of 
the financing 
agreement.  
9.  Northern Corridor 
Rehabilitation Programme -
Phase III                    - Kenya 
National Highways Authority  26.11.2010  31.10.2015   The Project closure 
report was not 
provided for audit, 
eight (8) years after 
the expiry of  the 
closure date.  
10.  Kenya Transport Sector 
Support Project (Credit 
No.4926KE and NO.5410 
KE) - Kenya National 
Highways Authority   31.12.2018   The Project has 
continued 
operations four and 
a half (4½) years 
after closure date 
and no closure 
report was provided 
for audit review.  
11.  Northern Corridor Transport 
Improvement Project  IDA 
Credit      No. 3930 -KE and 
4571- KE - Kenya National 
Highways Authority   30.12.2015   The Project closure 
report was not 
provided for audit, 
eight (8) years after 
the expiry of the 
closure date.  
12.  Kenya       Informal 
Settlement Improvement 
Project  No. P113542 Credit 
NO. 4873KE - State 
Department for Housing and 
Urban Development  01.07.2011  30.12.2020   The Project had not 
been closed and no 
explanation was 
provided for the 
failure to close the 
project in 
accordance with the 
Financing  
Agreements.  
13.  Kisumu Urban Project 
(Project Advance Account) 
– CKE 1035.01.G  - County 
Government of Kisumu  19.02.2020  31.01.2022   The Project 
Management had 
not commenced the 
closure procedure 
and did not submit 
the report for audit.  
14.  Kisumu Urban Project 
(Cash Expenditure Fund) – 
CKE 1035.01.G  - County 
Government of Kisumu   30.06.2022  6,772  The Project 
Management had 
not commenced the 
closure procedures.  101 
 S/No  Project  Start Date  End Date  Idle 
Balances  
(Kshs.)  Remarks  
15.  Sound Chemicals 
Management  
Mainstreaming and UPOPS  
Reduction in Kenya Project 
NO. P00099820 - State 
Department for 
Environment and Climate 
Change  May 2016  31.12.2021   The project had not 
been closed and the 
closure report was 
not provided for 
audit review  
16.  Kenya Italy Debt for 
Development  Programme - 
State Department for Water 
and Sanitation  
 2007  30.06.2022  24,494,573  No evidence was 
provided for audit 
review to show that 
the Programme 
closure process had 
started.  
17.  GRANT/CREDIT 
NO.02HS/LVNWWDA/BUS
IA/054 - Busia Water  and 
Sewerage Services  
Company Limited 25.09.2020  31.12.2021   The Project had not 
been closed and no 
explanation was 
provided for the 
failure to close the 
Project in 
accordance with the 
provisions of the 
Financing Contract.  
18.  Revitalizing Irish Potato 
Production for Covid -19 
Affected Small - Scale 
Producers Project (IFAD 
Grants - No. 2000003589 
and 200000396600) - 
Agriculture and Food 
Authority  15.09.2022  31.12.2022  1,208,000  Management did 
not provide an 
explanation for to 
formally close the 
project. 
19.  Multinational Lake Victoria 
Maritime Communications 
and Transport (MLVMCT) 
Project – Kenya Maritime 
Authority   30.04.2022  56,379,591  The Project had not 
been closed and no 
explanation was 
provided for the 
failure to close the 
Project.  
 Total    104,912,088   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 102 
 Appendix  I: Comingling of Funds – Failure to Maintain Separate Bank  
Accounts for the Projects  
S/No  Project  Remarks  
1.  Promotion of Youth Employment and Vocational Training 
in Kenya (Phase I) Reference: Loan No. BMZ  2016 67, 211 
& BMZ No. 2016 65 298 and Project Grant Reference: No. 
1930 05 527 - State Department for Technical, Vocational 
Education  and Training  Failure to Open and Maintain a 
Separate Bank Account . 
2.  Promotion of Youth Employment and Vocational Training  
In Kenya (Phase II) Loan No. BMZ 2018 65 120 - State 
Department for Technical, Vocational Education and 
Training  Failure to Open and Maintain a 
Separate Project Bank Account . 
3.  DANIDA Primary Healthcare (PHC) Support Program - 
Ministry of Health  
 Thirty -seven (37) Counties 
operated project accounts which 
did not have the name of the 
Project.  
4.  Nairobi - Thika Highway Improvement Project Lot 3 
Government Concessional Loan Agreement No. (2009) 39 
Total No. (290) - Kenya National Highways Authority  The Project funds were comingled 
in the Kenya National Highways 
Authority's operational bank 
account instead of handling them in 
a separate bank account.  
5.  Eastern Africa Regional Transport, Trade and 
Development Facilitation Project - (IDA CR -5638) - Keny a 
National Highways Authority  The Authority commingling funds 
for all the Projects undertaken by 
the Authority and the Authority’s 
own funds.  
6.  Mombasa Special Economic Zone Development Project (I) 
- Kenya National Highways Authority  The Project funds were  comingled 
in the Kenya National Highways 
Authority's operational bank 
account instead of handling them in 
a separate bank account.  
7.  Kenya Enabling Activities for HFC Phase -Down Project 
(Grant No. UNEP/KEN/SEV/81/TAS/01+) - State 
Department for Environmen t and Climate Change  
 Project did not maintain a separate 
bank account and  cash book but  
relied on the Ministry’s 
development cash book for 
recording its  
transactions.  
8.  Kenya Towns Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation 
Program CR.N O. P -KE-E00- 011 (AFDB Loan 
No.2000200000501) - Central Rift Valley Water Works 
Development Agency  The Program does not  maintain a 
designated bank account and its 
activities are funded through the 
implementing agency bank 
account.  
9.  Kisii Water Supply and Sanitation Project - ORIO11/KE/21 
- Lake Victoria South Water Works Development Agency  
 The Management did not maintain 
a cash book and a separate  bank 
account for the Project.  
10.  Water Sector Development Programme – Lake Victoria 
South (Kericho, Kisii, Nyamira and Litein) Loan No. BMZ The Project’s records indicated that 
the Project Management used the  103 
 S/No  Project  Remarks  
2010 65 861 and Grant NO. BMZ 2010 70 457 - Lake 
Victoria South Water Works Development Agency  
 Implementing Agency’s bank 
account and cash book to process 
receipts and payme nts relating to 
the Project.  
11.  Trilateral Development Cooperation in Kenya, Water and 
Sanitation Sector Project (Credit No. BMZ 201365352) - 
Lake Victoria South Water Works Development Agency  
 
 The Project's implementing agency 
does not operate a  separate bank 
account for the Project but instead 
manages the Project funds in the  
Agency's bank accounts  together 
with other Agency funds.  
12.  Northern Collector Phase 1 – Additional Rehabilitation and 
Development of the Network Project (Credit Number CKE -
1074) - Athi Water Works Development Agency  The Management did not maintain 
a separate project bank account for 
the Government of Kenya 
contribution to the Project.  
13.  Bura Rehabilitation Development Project – National 
Irrigation Authority  The Project does not have  a 
separate account, but continued to 
receive the counterpart funds 
through the National Irrigation  
Authority’s development  
bank account number.  
14.  Mwea Irrigation Development Project – Loan Agreement 
No. KE -P27 -  National  Irrigation Authority  
 The Project  does not have a  
separate account, but continued to 
receive the counterpart funds 
through the National  Irrigation 
Authority’s  development bank 
account.  
15.  Eastern Africa Regional Transport, Trade and 
Development Facilitation Project IDA Credit No. 5638 -KE 
(MICT) - Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) Authority  The Authority did not open and 
maintain a separate  program 
operating account.  
16.  Bogoria Silali Geothermal Project (Loan No.2013.66.103) - 
Geothermal Development Company Limited  
 Payments relating to the Project 
were made outside the Project 
account.  
17.  Multinational Kenya -Tanzania Power Interconnection 
Project (Kenyan Component) (ADF Loan 
No.2100150032846) - Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited 
 Project funds were commingled 
with other projects funds in a single 
bank account. and no cash book 
that was maintained for processing 
and recording financial transactions 
for the Project.  
18.  Rural Electrification in Five Regions Project (Credit 
NO.11/597KE, Credit NO.1407PKE) - Rural Electri fication 
and Renewable Energy Corporation  
 No separate bank account was 
opened and operated by  the Project 
and Project funds were 
commingled  in the  Corporation’s 
bank accounts  where project 
payments and receipts are 
recorded.  104 
 S/No  Project  Remarks  
19.  Power Transmission System Improvement Project Credit 
Number 2100150023752 - Kenya Electricity Transmission 
Company Limited The Corporation maintains two (2) 
bank accounts in two (2) 
commercial banks for the purpose 
of setting way leaves and taxes for 
all the Projects under its cont rol. 
This made it difficult to separate 
and trace the cash balances for 
each of the Projects.  
20.  Menengai Geothermal Project Agreement No. CKE 
1038.01K - Geothermal Development Company Limited  
 The project funds were commingled 
in several bank accounts 
main tained by the Company for all 
projects.  
21.  Rwabura Irrigation Development Project – National 
Irrigation Authority  
 The Management does not have a 
separate Project account and 
continued to receive the 
counterpart funds through the 
National Irrigation Authority’s 
Development bank account.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 105 
 Appendix J: Counterpart Funding Issues  
S/No.  Project  Remarks  
1.  DANIDA Primary Healthcare (PHC) 
Support Program - Ministry of Health   Three (3) Counties of Bomet, Bungoma and 
Taita/Taveta did not provide their 
counterpart funds of Kshs.21,101,000.  
 
 Ten (10) Counties did not provide Special 
Purpose bank statements and vote books to 
confirm compliance with the co -financing 
requirements amounting to 
Kshs.204,001,570.  
2.  Upgrading of “Gilgil Machinery”  Road 
Project – Kenya Rural Roads Authority  
  The total cumulative counterpart funding 
from the Government of Kenya was 
Kshs.162,500,000 which represents 41% of 
the total counterpart financing projection of 
Kshs.400,000,000.  
 
 With the expected closing date  of the project 
set at 30 July, 2024, it is doubtful that the 
counterpart financing balance of 
Kshs.237,500,000 or 59% will be disbursed 
for the Project activities before closure date.  
3.  Eastern Africa Regional Transport, Trade 
and Development Facilitation  Project - 
(IDA CR -5638) – Kenya National 
Highways Authority   The balance of counterpart funding of 
Kshs.8,340,954,058 or 66% had not been 
disbursed to fund the Project’s activities as 
at 30 June, 2023.  
 
 With only six (6) months to the closing date 
of the Project on 29 December, 2023 it is 
doubtful that the balance will be disbursed 
in its entirety.  
4.  Kenya Towns Sustainable Water Supply 
and Sanitation Program CR.NO. P- KE-
E00-011 (AFDB LOAN 
NO.2000200000501) - Central Rift Valley 
Water Works Development Agency  
  Out of the total Government of Kenya 
counterpart funding commitment of 
Kshs.2,073,227,699 only Kshs.569,059,620 
(or 27%) had been disbursed leaving 
balance of Kshs.1,504,168,049 undrawn 
with the Project coming to a close on                                           
31 December, 2025.  
5.  Northern Collector Phase 1 – Additional 
Rehabilitation and Development of the 
Network Project (Credit Number CKE -
1074) - Athi Water Works Development 
Agency   Counterpart funds amounting to 
Kshs.775,161,950 not accounted for in the 
financial statements for the year ended                      
30 June, 2023.  
6.  Last Mile Connectivity Project II Loan 
No.2000200000152 - The Kenya Power 
and Lighting Company Plc  
  The legality of the GOK counterpart amount 
utilized to date of Kshs.5,143,377,000 
against Kshs.1,982,912,640 provided in the 
financing agreement could not be 
confirmed.  106 
 S/No.  Project  Remarks  
7.  Kenya Electricity Modernization Project 
(IDA Credit No. 5587 -KE) - Rural 
Electrification and Renewable Energy 
Corporation   Out of the expected GoK counterpart fund 
amounting to Kshs.100,000,000, 
Kshs.99,950,000 had not been disbursed 
despite the Project period having lapsed on               
30 June, 2023.  
8.  Kenya Cereal Enhancement 
Programme -Climate Resilient  
Agricultural Livelihood Window (KCEP -
CRAL) EU Grant  
No.2000000623, Grant No.2000001522, 
Grant No.2000003493, Grant 
No.2000001122 and IFAD Loan 
2000001121 - State Department for Crop 
Development   The government of Kenya did not tr ansfer to 
the project Kshs.20,000,000 being 
counterpart funding for the financial year 
ended                           30 June, 2023.  
9.  National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive 
Growth Project (IDA Credit No. 5900 -KE) 
- State Department for Crop 
Development  
  The National and County Governments had 
not remitted counterpart funds amounting to 
Kshs.159,606,369 and Kshs.592,876,249 
respectively contrary to the provisions of the 
financing agreement.  
10.  Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project 
(IDA Credit  NO. 5945 -KE) - State 
Department for Crop Development  
  Busia County, Bomet County and Siaya 
County had not remitted counterpart funds 
amounting to Kshs.120,554,295, 
Kshs.1,887,950 and Kshs.44,676,011 
respectively, all tota lling to 
Kshs.167,118,256  
11.  Agricultural Sector Development Support 
Programme II (SIDA Grant No: 
51110109) - State Department for Crop 
Development   Government of Kenya and the County 
Governments counterpart funds amounting 
to Kshs.255,147,303 had not been 
disbursed with the project cl osing on                         
29 February, 2024.  
12.  National Agricultural Value Chain 
Development Project (Credit No. IDA -
7064- KE) - State Department for Crop 
Development   Although the financing agreement provided 
for Kshs.3,000,000,000 counterpart funds,  
no funds were received by the project as 
Counterpart funds.  
13.  Programme for Legal Empowerment and 
Aid Delivery (Project Credit Number 
KE/FED/2018/397 -591) E - State Law 
Office and Department of Justice  
  Although the Project financial statements 
reflect counterpart funds amounting to 
Kshs.4,000,000, counterpart funding was 
not spelt out in the Financing Agreement.  
 
 
 
 107 
 Appendix K: Procurement Issues  
S/No.  Project  Issue  Details  
1.  Support to Technical and 
Vocational Education Training 
and Entrepreneurship (TVETE 
Project Phase III) (Loan  
No.2100150042254) - State 
Department for Technical, 
Vocational Education and 
Training  
 Consultancy 
Services   The contract was signed on                      
17 August, 2022 which was nine (9) 
days after notifications were sent to 
the bidders on 08 August, 2022 and 
before lapse of fourteen (14) days 
contrary to Section 68(2) of the Public 
Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 
2015.  
 
 The performance bond lapsed on 09 
August, 2023 but there was no 
evidence of its renewal.  
2.  East Africa Skills for 
Transformation and Regional  
Integration Project (EASTRIP) 
(IDA Loan No. 6334 -KE) – 
Meru  National Polytechnic  
 Lack of Value 
for Money on 
Consultancy 
Fees   Payment of Kshs.16,747,626 to the 
consultant made without signing any 
contract agreement contrary to 
Regulation 63 of Public Procurement 
and Asset Disposal Regulations, 
2020.  
  
 Payment of Kshs.27,501,339 to the 
consultant being full contract sum for 
the supervision services contract 
despite the project stalling at  50% 
complete.  
3.  Support to Enhancement of 
Quality and Relevance in 
Higher Education, Science 
and Technology Project Credit 
No. 2100150027993 - State 
Department for Higher 
Education and  Research  
 Irregular 
Consultancy 
Services 
Contract   The State Department entered into a 
contract for the provision of 
consultancy services to conduct end 
of project evaluation on                                  
22 October, 2021 after the lapse of 
the tender validity period on                                                 
9 September, 2021.  
 
 This was contrary to Clause 12.1 of 
the Request for Proposal Document 
and Section 135(3) of the Public 
Procurement and Asset Disposal                 
Act, 2015.  
4.  Support to Enhancement of 
Quality and Relevance in 
Higher Education, Science 
and Technology Project Credit 
No. 2100150027993 - State 
Department for Higher 
Education and  Research  
 Repair of 
Wangari  
Mathai Institute 
of Peace and 
Environment  
Studies   The State Department paid 
Kshs.15,000,000 to the University of 
Nairobi for the repair of teaching and 
learning facilities at Wangari Mathai  
Institute of Peace and Environment 
Studies.  However,  procurement 
documents were not provided 
contrary to Section 44(2)(d)  of the 
Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015  
 108 
 S/No.  Project  Issue  Details  
5.  Support to Enhancement of 
Quality and Relevance in 
Higher Education, Science 
and Technology Project Credit 
No. 2100150027993 - State 
Department for Higher 
Education and  Research  
 Tracer Study 
on Destination 
of Engineering 
Graduates   The five months tracer study on the 
destination of engineering graduates 
from Kenyan Universities awarded at 
Kshs.19,804,158 was not supported 
with certificate confirming the right 
quality of service as part of contract  
close out required under Section 154 
of the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015.  
 
 The study has delayed, and the 
consultant was not charged 
liquidated damages in accordance 
with Section 140(b) of the Public 
Procurement and Asset Disposal 
Act, 2015.  
6.  Eastern and Southern Higher 
Education Centres of 
Excellence (ACE II) Project 
(Credit No.5798 -KE) - State 
Department for Higher 
Education and  Research  
 Local 
Purchase 
Order Issued 
after 
Procurement   The local purchase order for 
conference facilities service provided 
between 26 September, 2023 and 8 
October, 2022 was generated 5 
months later on 2 March, 2023.  
 
 This was contrary to Section 106(5) 
of the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015  
7.  Africa Center of Excellence in 
Sustainable Use of Insects as 
Food and Feeds Project (IDA 
Credit No.5798 -KE) - 
Jaramogi Oginga Odinga 
University of Science And  
Technology  
 Irregularities in 
Procurement 
of Air Tickets   Procurement of foreign travel air 
tickets amounting to 
Kshs.10,724,990 through request for 
quotations with no evidence of 
appointment of the tender opening 
committee or the quotation 
evaluation committee.    
 This is contrary to Section 78 and 80 
of the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015  
8.  Global Fund - To Reduce 
Malaria Incidence and Deaths 
by at Least 75 Percent of the 
2016 Levels by 2023, Working  
Towards a Malaria - Free 
Kenya - Ministry of Health  
 Irregular 
Procurement 
of Conference 
Facilities   Procurement of provision of 
conference facilities amounting to 
Kshs.13,055,321 through request for 
quotations that were above the 
maximum threshold of 
Kshs.3,000,000.  
 
 This was contrary to Section 105(a) 
of the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015 and the Second 
Schedule o f the Public Procurement 
and Asset Disposal Regulations, 
2020.  109 
 S/No.  Project  Issue  Details  
9.  Kapchorwa -Suam -Kitale and 
Eldoret Bypass Roads Project 
(Kenya) ID NO. P -Z1-DBO -
183 - Kenya National 
Highways Authority  
 Lack of a 
Procurement 
Plan  Management did not provide an 
annual procurement plan prepared 
as part of the annual budget 
preparation process for audit. 
 
 This is contrary to Regulation 40 of 
the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Regulations, 2020.  
10.  The Establishment of Bus 
Rapid Transit Line 5 Project - 
(EDCF Loan Agreement No. 
KEN-5) - Kenya Urban Roads  
Authority  
 Irregular  
Clause on 
Financing 
Agreement 
and Non-
Compliance 
with the Public  
Procurement 
and Asset 
Disposal                
Act, 2015   Review of Part IV and Schedule 4 of 
the Project’s Financing Agreement 
revealed that suppliers other than 
nationals of the Republic of South 
Korea or judicial person incorporated 
and registered therein were not 
allowed to bid for the consultancy 
services.  
 
 This is contrary to Section 60(1) of 
the Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act, 2015.  
11.  SC Reporting Tool Kit Project 
- State Department for 
Environment and Climate 
Change  Procurement of 
Laptops and 
Tablets   The Project incurred Kshs.2,240,000 
incurred to procure four (4) laptops 
and two (2) tablets.  
 
 However , procurement documents 
including quotations to various firms, 
opening and adhoc evaluation 
committee minutes were not 
provided for audit.  
12.  Eastern Africa Regional 
Transport, Trade and  
Development Facilitation 
Project IDA Credit No. 5638 -
KE (MICT) - Informa tion and 
Communication Technology 
(ICT) Authority  
 Irregular 
Variation of 
Contract   A contract for supply, installation, 
testing commissioning, training, 
warranty, and maintenance of two 
(2) optical fibre networks (backbone 
access) along the Eldoret, Ndapal, 
Nakodok Road was awarded at 
Kshs.354,488,355.    
 Through Addendum No.3 of 02 
February, 2023, the contract was 
varied upwards by 
Kshs.172,969,700 or 49% of the 
contract sum.  
 
 This contract variation exceeded 
25%, contrary to Section 139(4)(e) 
of the Public Procurement and 
Asset Disposal Act, 2015.  
 
 110 
 Appendix  L: Stalled and Delayed Donor Funded Projects  
 
 
 
S/No  Project Title   
Contract 
Amount  
(Kshs.)  Cumulative 
Amount Paid as 
at 30 June, 2023  
(Kshs.)  Description  
1 Thwake  Multi -Purpose 
Development Project  - State 
Department  for Water and 
Sanitation  36,971,346,445  32,836,105,729  Stalled construction of the 
Dam  
2 Kenya Towns Sustainable 
Water Supply and 
Sanitation Program -
AWWDA  1,064,488,726  551,167,160  Stalled construction of Kitui 
and Matuu Towns last mile 
connectivity of w ater and 
Sanitation and Changamwe 
repolling sewer network  
3 Drought Resilience and 
Sustainable Livelihood 
Programme  20,172,199  10,003,345  Stalled drilling and 
development of boreholes  
4 Drought Resilience and 
Sustainable Livelihood 
Programme  11,959,011  7,482,192  Stalled construction of 
livestock market yard  
5 Enable Youth Kenya 
Program  8,318,517  - Stalled works at the Regional 
Pastoral Center  - Narok  
6 AWWDA -Northern Collector 
Phase 1  - Additional 
Rehabilitation and 
Development of the Network 
Project  - Athi Water Works 
Development Agency  1,254,843,096  - Delayed implementation of 
Kigoro Water Treatment Plant 
and delayed completion of 10 
ablution blocks within Nairobi 
informal settlements in 
Kawangware, Mukuru kwa 
Reuben, Huruma and 
Mathare  
7 Kenya Urban Support 
Programme - V0360 KE  - 
State Dep artment  for 
Housing and Urban 
Development  3,276,222,307  1,564,134,907  Delayed completion of 
modern market and 
installation of high mast flood 
lights in Kericho County, 
construction of Kitale 
Business Centre in Kitale 
Municipality, upgrading of 64 
Stadium in Municipality of 
Eldoret, construction of 
Kithomboani Modern Market  
in Kitui Town and delayed 
development of Afraha 
Stadium in Nakuru County  
8 KETRACO -220 KV AND 
132 KV Transmission Lines 
and Sub -stations (EXIM 
Bank of India)  3,032,923,290  
 1,863,799,765  
 Delayed completion of the 
project leading to additional 
costs amounting to 
Kshs.489,431,219 equivalent 
to USD 3,482,913.67  
9 Bura Rehabilitation 
Development Project -
National Irrigation Authority  3,551,206,409  1,944,039,883  Delayed construction of the 
Project, Phase1: was at 90% 
complete, Phase 2: was at 
38% complete) while Phase 3: 
had not started (0%).  111 
  
 
 
S/No  Project Title   
Contract 
Amount  
(Kshs.)  Cumulative 
Amount Paid as 
at 30 June, 2023  
(Kshs.)  Description  
10 Kenya Towns Sustainable 
Water Supply and 
Sanitation Program  - Athi 
Water Works Development 
Agency  978,444,796  - Slow implementation of four 
(4) water and sewerage 
projects of Makutano Water 
Supply and Sewage, 
Machakos Water Supply, 
Machakos Sewerage and 
Water distribution for Malindi 
and Watamu  
11 Programme for Legal 
Empowerment and Aid 
Delivery  - State Law Office 
and Department of Justice  806,927,175  83,487,210  The project has been in the 
operational implementation 
phase for the last sixty (60) 
months with 10% works done 
whereas the project 
implementation period had 
lapsed  
12 Lake Victoria Water and 
Sanitation Project CKE 
1093 02M  253,963,222  195,336,194  Delayed implementation of 
the consultancy contract  
13 Drought Resilience and 
Sustainable Livelihoods 
Programme  15,569,806  9,469,016  Delayed completion of drilling 
and development of 
community boreholes  
14 Kenya Transport Sector 
Support Project Credit No. s 
4926- KE and 5410 -KE- 
KENHA  6,229,173,463  - Delayed completion of Athi 
River Machakos turn off  
15 Kenya Transport Sector 
Support Project Credit No. s 
4926- KE and 5410 -KE- 
KENHA  1,314,945,369  - Delayed completion of dualing 
of Kisumu Boy's roundabout - 
Mambolea Junction  
16 Kenya Transport Sector 
Support Project Credit No. s 
4926- KE and 5410 -KE- 
KENHA  1,388,321,424  - Delayed completion of Ahero 
interchange junction and 
Kericho interchange junction  
17 Kisii Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project - 
ORIO11/KE/21 - LVSWWA  10,800,000,000  86,344,504  Delayed project 
implementation due            to 
additional costs  
18 Mariakani Substation 
Project  - KETRACO  - 2,194,361,772  Delayed implementation of 
the project  
19 Nairobi Metropolitan Service 
Improvement Project 
(NAMSIP) Cr. No. 5102 KE  1,056,478,730  816,649,308  Delayed completion of the 
project  
20 Small -scale Irrigation and 
Value Addition Project 
(SIVAP)  538,793,797  284,775,327  Delayed implementation of 
the project  
21 Support to Enhancement of 
Quality and Relevance in 
Higher Education, Science 
and Technology Project 
Grant/Credit Number - 
ADF/2  - 2,617,434,820  Delayed completion of the 
project  112 
  
 
 
S/No  Project Title   
Contract 
Amount  
(Kshs.)  Cumulative 
Amount Paid as 
at 30 June, 2023  
(Kshs.)  Description  
22 2018 Promotion of Youth 
Employment and vocational 
Training in Kenya (Phase II 
Project)  1,403,000,000  22,990,369  Slow pace of project take off 
and low absorption of funds 
whereby the Project has not 
received any of the expected 
donor funds amounting to 
Kshs.1,380,000,000  
23 Bogoria Silali Geothermal 
Project - GDC  76,173,144,000  10,859,863,000  Delayed  project 
implementation since the 
project's milestones are 
behind the estimated 
timelines  
24 Horn of Africa Gateway 
Development Project - 
Transport  1,342,850,000  58,355,555  Delayed  project 
implementation due to low 
uptake of funds while the 
Project is in its third year of 
implementation  
25 Improvement of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation 
Systems in Mombasa: 
Mwache Project  159,881,649  - Slow implementation of the 
Mwache project despite the 
payments in relation to 
consultancy services and 
emergency works.  
26 Kenya Industry and 
Entrepreneurship Project  700,699,602  331,875,790  Delayed                    project 
implementation whereby the 
projects' implementation 
status could not be confirmed 
as at                                     30 
June 2023. The contract 
extension procedures were 
not explained  
27 National Urban Transport 
Improvement Project           
cr. No.5140 - KENHA, IDA  20,414,794,998  24,374,445,874  Delayed road project 
implementation where the 
contractor had achieved 
overall physical progress of 
72% as at 30 June, 2023 and 
contract period was 97% 
lapsed  
28 Secondary Education 
Quality Improvement 
Project - SDBE  6,324,559,856  4,812,293,317  Delayed completion of 
construction of classrooms, 
laboratories and sanitation 
facilities with 16 classrooms, 
35 laboratories, 5 water 
projects and 388 sanitation 
blocks not commenced as at 
30 June, 202 3 
29 Secondary Education 
Quality Improvement 
Project - SDBE  331,252,700  133,581,401  Slow progress on re -tendered 
works on construction of 
classrooms, laboratories and 
sanitation facilities at 33% 
completion as at 30 June, 
2023 and 5 classrooms, 6 
laboratories, 8 water projects 113 
  
 
 
S/No  Project Title   
Contract 
Amount  
(Kshs.)  Cumulative 
Amount Paid as 
at 30 June, 2023  
(Kshs.)  Description  
and 37 sanitation blocks not 
commenced  
30 Transforming Health 
Systems for Universal Care 
Project THS -UC Project  19,684,400,000  18,369,511,838  Delayed disbursement of 
funds leading to an                       
undrawn balance  of     
Kshs.1,314,888,162 and thus 
the project's objectives may 
not be fully met by the end of 
the project  
31 Kenya Electricity Expansion 
Project (KEEP) - Project Cr 
No. 1487P  2,609,159,289  1,109,159,289  Delayed implementation of 
the project  
32 Kenya South Sudan Link 
Road Project  12,611,735,371  134,317,133  Delayed implementation of 
the project  
33 Upgrading of Gilgil 
Machinery Roads to 
Bitumen Standard  1,476,491,036  1,262,502,564  Delayed completion of the 
road project  
34 Rural Electrification in Five 
Regions Project (BADEA) - 
REREC  1,523,144,961  - Projects with a total contract 
sum of Kshs.1,523,144,961 
had not started although 95% 
of the project time had lapsed.  
35 Kenya Towns Sustainable 
Water Supply and 
Sanitation Program 
(CRVWWDA)  7,347,395,990  - Delayed implementation in 10 
Projects  
36 Mombasa -Mariakani 
Highway Project Lot 1 -
KENHA ADB  6,016,868,260  - Delayed completion of 
Mombasa - Mariakani 
Highway  
37 Mwea Irrigation 
Development Project  920,117,880  - Slow project implementation - 
Lot 1  
38 The Bagamoyo -Horo Horo 
Lunga Lunga Malindi Road 
Project (Phase 1)  - KENHA  7,590,747,593  744,572,077  Slow project implementation - 
Lot 1  
39 Water and Sanitation 
Development Project 
(WSDP)  8,769,600  1,955,859  Delayed Projects 
Implemented by Kwale Water 
and Sewerage Company 
Limited (KWAWASCO)  
 Total  239,213,110,567  107,280,015,198    
 AUDITOR-GENERAL’S SUMMARY REPORT 
ON NATIONAL GOVERNMENT         2022/2023
SUMMARY OF THE 
AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT  
ON NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
2021/2022
Office of the Auditor-General Kenya oagkenyaCONTACTS
3rd Floor, Anniversary Towers, University Way, Nairobi
Phone: +254 020 3214000  Email: info@oagkenya.go.ke  Website: https://www.oagkenya.go.ke/
@OAG_Kenya
AUDITOR-GENERAL’S SUMMARY REPORT 
ON NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
2022/2023


